Using no additional skill here — this is a straightforward ad-prompt-writing task with a clear deliverable format requested by the user, so I'll proceed directly.

Since this is a **still poster** (not a film), I'm writing one core image prompt and adapting it for the two required aspect ratios (1:1 and 4:5), using your 3 attached product/logo photos as references for Nano Banana 2.

```json
{
  "prompts": [
    {
      "scene": 1,
      "prompt": "Aspect ratio 1:1. Using the attached reference photos of the Mokobara Transit Backpack 30L and the Mokobara logo, create a clean launch poster. Place the backpack as the hero product, angled 3/4 view, standing upright on a soft-shadowed neutral surface (warm off-white or light concrete tone), styled like premium travel-gear editorial photography — soft directional studio light from top-left, gentle contact shadow, crisp product detail on the front zip pocket and trolley strap. Background: subtle gradient with a faint, blurred motion-suggestive backdrop (soft airport/road light streaks) to evoke 'the long way home' without cluttering the product. Reserve the top third of the frame for bold, modern sans-serif headline text in dark charcoal or deep navy: 'Room for the long way home.' Below the headline, smaller uppercase tracked text: 'TRANSIT BACKPACK · 30L'. Place the Mokobara logo (from reference) small and clean in the bottom-left or bottom-right corner, with 'mokobara.com' in a thin light sans-serif directly beneath or beside it. Maintain generous white space, balanced centered product placement, no extra props, no people, high-end minimalist travel-brand aesthetic, sharp focus on backpack texture and hardware.",
      "duration_s": null
    },
    {
      "scene": 2,
      "prompt": "Aspect ratio 4:5. Same composition and product treatment as the square version: using the attached reference photos of the Mokobara Transit Backpack 30L and logo, hero product 3/4 angle on a neutral soft-shadowed surface, premium studio lighting, subtle blurred motion-streak background suggesting travel/movement. Because the frame is taller, extend breathing room above and below the product — headline 'Room for the long way home.' sits in upper third in bold modern sans-serif (dark charcoal/navy), 'TRANSIT BACKPACK · 30L' in smaller tracked caps just under it, product centered and slightly larger in frame, Mokobara logo plus 'mokobara.com' anchored at the bottom margin with clear spacing from the product base. Keep vertical rhythm balanced for mobile/portrait viewing, sharp product detail, minimal premium travel-brand look, no added props or people.",
      "duration_s": null
    }
  ],
  "riskiest_scene": 0,
  "notes": "This is a still-image poster request (1:1 and 4:5), not a film — 'duration_s' doesn't apply, so it's set to null for both. Both prompts are near-identical in styling for brand consistency, differing only in framing/whitespace to suit each aspect ratio. Key risk areas for Nano Banana 2: (1) accurately rendering the Mokobara logo and exact wordmark 'mokobara.com' as legible text rather than garbled type — logo/text fidelity is the single biggest failure point in AI-generated ad posters, so a manual overlay/cleanup pass in a design tool may be needed after generation; (2) keeping the product's real texture/hardware faithful to the reference photos rather than a generic backpack. Recommend generating both, then double-checking headline and URL text sharpness before final export."
}
```