Using no external tool here — this is a creative-writing/ad-treatment task, not a coding task, so none of the "superpowers" skills (brainstorming for building software, debugging, frontend-design, etc.) apply. Proceeding directly with the senior-creative-director treatment as the user explicitly instructed.

```json
{
  "ideas": [
    {
      "truth": "We trust water that tastes like it came from someone who loved us, not from a brand that tells us it's pure.",
      "moment": "The instant you notice a copper bottle on your own kitchen ledge doing exactly what your Dadi's matka used to do overnight.",
      "key_frame": "A sharp, sunlit copper bottle in the foreground; a soft, blurred copper matka echoing behind it — old and new doing the same job."
    },
    {
      "truth": "Modern mornings are rushed — the rituals that took care of us quietly get dropped, not rejected.",
      "moment": "A working person grabs the copper bottle off the counter along with keys and tiffin, on the way out the door.",
      "key_frame": "Copper bottle standing between a bunch of keys and a steel tiffin box, morning light slicing across a small kitchen counter."
    },
    {
      "truth": "Some objects earn a place on the shelf simply because they carry care in their material, not their marketing.",
      "moment": "The bottle sits alone on a windowsill at golden hour, exactly where a family's copper vessel would have once caught the same light.",
      "key_frame": "A single copper bottle on a sunlit windowsill, dust motes drifting through a shaft of late-afternoon light, nothing else in frame."
    }
  ],
  "chosen": 0,
  "why": "It directly answers the customer's own headline (Dadi's water) and follows the craft note to sell against home-made ritual rather than rival brands — the matka-echo does the persuading, so the ad needs no invented claims.",
  "treatment": "We open on a single still: a copper bottle on a wooden window ledge in soft, low morning light, a bead of condensation caught mid-slide down its neck. Behind it, out of focus, is the ghost of a copper matka — the vessel every Indian household once kept water in overnight so it would taste right by morning. The bottle sits in sharp, warm focus; the matka is a memory, not a subject. No hands, no faces — just the quiet exchange between old and new doing the same job. Warm rose-gold tones, one soft highlight, one honest shadow, on clean unmarked copper. Above the bottle, calm open light carries the headline in Hinglish: 'Paani, jaise Dadi rakhti thi.' Below, price and brand sit in the same calm space: Tamra, Pure Copper Bottle 1L, ₹899.",
  "scenes": [
    {
      "n": 1,
      "prompt": "An Instagram product ad photo of a tall cylindrical pure copper water bottle with a smooth polished rose-gold surface, a matching copper screw cap, no printed logo, and a slightly narrowed neck, standing on a rustic wooden window ledge in a small-town Indian home. One condensation droplet slides down its shoulder in warm early-morning sunlight, with a traditional copper matka softly blurred behind it, echoing the same ritual. Side-lit with a bright highlight edge and a deeper shadow edge on the cylinder, plus a soft contact shadow beneath the bottle so it feels grounded, not floating. Clean, unmarked copper surfaces, warm golden palette, shallow depth of field. Leave calm, softly lit open space across the top third of the frame for a headline, and a calm strip along the bottom third for brand and price text.",
      "duration_s": 0,
      "references": [],
      "spoken": "",
      "on_screen_copy": ["Tamra", "Paani, jaise Dadi rakhti thi.", "Pure Copper Bottle 1L", "₹899"],
      "first_frame_still_prompt": "An Instagram product ad photo of a tall cylindrical pure copper water bottle with a smooth polished rose-gold surface, a matching copper screw cap, no printed logo, and a slightly narrowed neck, standing on a rustic wooden window ledge in a small-town Indian home. One condensation droplet slides down its shoulder in warm early-morning sunlight, with a traditional copper matka softly blurred behind it, echoing the same ritual. Side-lit with a bright highlight edge and a deeper shadow edge on the cylinder, plus a soft contact shadow beneath the bottle so it feels grounded, not floating. Clean, unmarked copper surfaces, warm golden palette, shallow depth of field. Leave calm, softly lit open space across the top third of the frame for a headline, and a calm strip along the bottom third for brand and price text."
    }
  ],
  "riskiest_scene": 1,
  "finish": {
    "copy_placement": "Headline 'Paani, jaise Dadi rakhti thi.' sits in the calm top-third light band above the bottle; 'Tamra · Pure Copper Bottle 1L · ₹899' sits as a single calm line in the bottom-third band, set in the brand's own typeface for legibility over mood, checked against the dimmest patch of the wood/light behind it.",
    "end_card": "No separate end card — this single static frame is both hero shot and end frame; product stays sharp and centred with copy resting in the pre-planned calm bands.",
    "music": "Not applicable — this is a static Instagram feed image, no audio component."
  },
  "decisions": {
    "D1_idea": "The exact moment a copper bottle on today's kitchen ledge quietly does what Dadi's copper matka always did overnight.",
    "D2_conflict": "Modern homes have dropped the copper-matka ritual for convenience (plastic/steel bottles), losing the taste and trust that ritual gave, without anyone deciding to reject it.",
    "D3_roles": "Hero: the person who grew up drinking Dadi's copper-kept water but now defaults to plastic; Tamra is the guide/enabler that takes over the chore of copper-storage while keeping the valued tradition alive, per the note on modernizing a chore without discarding it.",
    "D4_opening": "A bold, sharp close-up: the copper bottle mid-frame with a single condensation droplet frozen on its shoulder, immediately readable as 'fresh, cool water' — no build-up needed since it's a single still.",
    "D5_brand": "Since this is one static frame, the product is visible from the first (only) moment; the Tamra name and spec line are carried purely as on-screen text overlay added afterward, not drawn on the bottle, since no real logo art exists yet.",
    "D6_ask_and_end": "The ask (buy at ₹899) is carried entirely by on-screen text, not voice or motion; the final frame is the product itself, sharp, centred, with copy resting in its pre-cleared calm bands — no separate CTA scene needed for a single-image feed ad.",
    "D7_product_truth": "Cylindrical bottle shape, pure-copper rose-gold colour, screw cap, roughly 1L-proportioned silhouette — all from the customer's own words ('pure copper bottle 1L'); no logo, embossing, or extra features are shown since none were supplied or confirmed.",
    "D8_deviations": "Treating the brief's inherited '15s/aspect 4:5' as a static single-frame Instagram photo, not a multi-scene film, because the customer explicitly asked for a feed ad and the media model (Nano Banana 2) is stills-only; also omitted any human hand/face to hold to Ogilvy's max-three-elements rule (bottle, matka-echo, light) for instant readability on a phone."
  }
}
```