Using superpowers: no dedicated skill in my available set matches this self-contained creative-direction brief (it's a single, fully-specified writing/deliverable task with its own required format), so I'm proceeding directly per the user's explicit framework, which takes precedence.

```json
{
  "ideas": [
    {
      "truth": "A bag stops being furniture and becomes desirable the instant light reveals what it's made of.",
      "moment": "The bag sits in shadow, then a shaft of warm light sweeps across it, hardware and texture catching fire, right before it's grabbed and carried out the door.",
      "key_frame": "Extreme macro on the zipper pull and hardware, warm light just beginning to cross it, background dark and soft."
    },
    {
      "truth": "First-day energy needs a bag that keeps pace with the rush.",
      "moment": "A hand reaches into frame, grips the strap, and lifts the bag off the table into motion toward the door.",
      "key_frame": "A hand entering from frame-right closing around the strap, bag mid-lift."
    },
    {
      "truth": "Packing well is its own small satisfaction before any trip begins.",
      "moment": "The zipper is pulled shut in one clean motion, sealing everything in with a decisive snap.",
      "key_frame": "Close-up on the zipper pull mid-travel, fabric taut on either side."
    }
  ],
  "chosen": 0,
  "why": "It's the only idea buildable purely from one still photo without inventing a person, a hand, or an action the reference can't support — safest and strongest fit for image-to-video-from-a-still with product fidelity intact.",
  "treatment": "One continuous 6-second shot, no cuts, no people. We open on an extreme macro of the bag's zipper pull and hardware sitting in shadow. The camera smoothly pulls back and rises as a warm shaft of light sweeps left to right across the bag's surface, catching texture and metal in a brief flare, fine dust motes drifting through the beam. The full bag is revealed standing centered against a soft, muted background. It settles with one subtle sway, as if just set down, then holds completely still. Sound is ambient only — quiet room tone, a soft fabric rustle, and a light metallic tick as the flare crosses the hardware. No dialogue. The final frame is the bag, fully lit, centered, still — clean space around it for brand text and CTA to be added afterward.",
  "scenes": [
    {
      "n": 1,
      "prompt": "Slow macro-to-wide camera move: begin extremely close on the bag's zipper pull and hardware, then pull back smoothly while rising slightly to reveal the entire bag standing centered in frame. As the camera moves, a warm directional shaft of light sweeps once across the bag's surface from left to right, catching texture and hardware with a brief soft flare; fine dust motes drift through the light beam. The bag settles with a single subtle sway, as if just set down, then holds completely still at the end, centered against a softly blurred, muted neutral background. Ambient room tone throughout, a light fabric rustle, and a soft metallic tick as the flare crosses the hardware. No dialogue. Cinematic, minimal, premium product-hero mood, shallow depth of field, warm golden-hour color grade, frame ends on a still, clean hero shot.",
      "duration_s": 6,
      "references": ["photo1"],
      "spoken": "",
      "on_screen_copy": [],
      "first_frame_still_prompt": "Extreme macro shot of the bag's zipper pull and adjacent hardware, sitting in soft shadow, background dark and out of focus, no light flare yet — the calm instant before the reveal.",
      "S1_feeling": "Quiet anticipation tipping into desire.",
      "S2_first_frame": "Tight, shadowed macro on the zipper/hardware — already implies something worth waiting to see fully.",
      "S3_one_action": "One continuous camera pull-back-and-rise from macro to full reveal, with a single light sweep and one settling sway, over 6 seconds.",
      "S4_new_information": "We learn what the bag actually looks like in full, and that it's built well enough to reward a close look — the previous frame withheld this on purpose.",
      "S5_impact": "The reveal lands on a bright, still, centered hero frame with clean negative space; big enough to read as a scroll-stopping product beat on a phone, and it leaves the exact end-frame needed for a CTA overlay."
    }
  ],
  "riskiest_scene": 1,
  "finish": {
    "copy_placement": "Hook line (no exclamation marks) appears as on-screen text in the upper third from ~0.5s, out of the way of the hardware and light flare; brand wordmark placed lower-third, present from first frame through to the end card so it reads with sound off; CTA text appears only in the final 1.5s over the still hero frame.",
    "end_card": "Hold on the final still hero frame (bag centered, fully lit) with brand wordmark and a short CTA ('Shop now' or equivalent) added as code-generated text — no new visual element introduced.",
    "music": "Yes — a soft, minimal, premium ambient bed with a gentle swell timed to the light sweep, resolving to a quiet hold on the final still frame."
  }
}
```