Awareness Video Ad Specs on Instagram Reels | Facebook Ads Guide
Review ad specifications for ads on Threads and start connecting your campaigns with an active, growing community.
Learn more
Meta Ads Guide
Find the latest Meta ad specifications, formats and placement best practices.
About
Image
Video
Carousel
Collection
Video
About Image Carousel Collection
Video
Instagram Reels
Instagram Reels is an experience that gives anyone - people, creators and businesses - the power to create entertaining short-form videos and the stage to share them with Instagram’s vibrant community. Reels ads provide an immersive, built-for-mobile opportunity to reach high-intent audiences engaging in entertainment through their interests.
You can use Reels ads to help tell your brand story in ways that are unique and authentic. Whether it’s participating in trending moments through challenges or educating potential customers through tutorials and product education to inspire, you should experiment with different types of video ads to discover what takes off with the community.
These fullscreen vertical video ads will be inserted in between organic Reels content. Similar to organic Reels, ads can be up to 15 minutes and people can comment, like, view, save, share and skip ads. Reels ads will be surfaced in the most popular places to access Reels content. Once a user taps into a Reel from Stories, Feed, Reels Tab, or Explore, they will be launched into a viewer that exclusively shows Reels that scroll vertically.
Design Recommendations
File Type: MP4, MOV
Ratio: 9:16
Video Settings: H.264 compression, square pixels, fixed frame rate, progressive scan and stereo AAC audio compression at 128kbps+
Resolution: 1440 x 2560 pixels
Video Captions: Optional, but recommended
Video Sound: Optional, but strongly recommended
Reels ads should not contain: Reels published before October 15, 2021.
Licensed music. We recommend using original audio or royalty-free music available in our Meta Sound Collection instead.
Media that has a face or camera effect.
Media with a GIF.
Media with product tags.
Videos that contain edit lists or special boxes in file containers.
Consider leaving at least 14% of the top, 35% of the bottom, and 6% on each side of your asset free from text, logos, or other important creative elements. This will help ensure that key parts of your design are not cropped, covered by the profile icon or call-to-action, or placed too close to the edges of devices with screens taller than a 9:16 aspect ratio.
Text Recommendations
Primary Text: 44 characters
Technical Requirements
Video Duration: 0 seconds to 15 minutes
Maximum File Size: 4GB
Minimum Width: 250 pixels for ads less than 30 seconds; 500 pixels for ads 30 seconds or longer
Learn More
Create Instagram Reels Ads in Ads Manager
Instagram Reels Ad Placement Availability by Country
About text overlays and safe zones
All ads must comply with our Advertising Policies .
Choose a placement
Select a placement option to discover which objectives are available.
Instagram Reels cross
Choose your ad placement.
Facebook Feed Facebook In-Stream Video Facebook Marketplace Facebook Stories Facebook Search Results Facebook Business Explore Facebook Reels Ads on Facebook Reels Instagram Feed Instagram Stories Instagram Explore home Instagram Reels Audience Network Native, Banner and Interstitial Audience Network Rewarded Video Messenger Stories Facebook Right Column Facebook Groups Feed
Facebook Feed Facebook In-Stream Video Facebook Marketplace Facebook Stories Facebook Search Results Facebook Business Explore Facebook Reels Ads on Facebook Reels Instagram Feed Instagram Stories Instagram Explore home Instagram Reels Audience Network Native, Banner and Interstitial Audience Network Rewarded Video Messenger Stories Facebook Right Column Facebook Groups Feed
Something went wrong
We're having trouble playing this video.
Learn more
Create an ad
Create a mockup
Choose an objective
Select an objective to see which calls to action are available.
Awareness cross
Support Objectives
Awareness Traffic Engagement Leads App promotion Sales
Awareness Traffic Engagement Leads App promotion Sales
Choose a conversion location
The conversion location is the place where you want people to take action. For some objectives, the conversion location is automatically selected for you.
On your ad
Get the latest updates from Meta for Business.
Provide your email address to receive the latest updates from Meta for Business, including news, events and product updates.
By submitting this form, you agree to receive marketing related electronic communications from Meta, including news, events, updates and promotional emails. You may withdraw your consent and unsubscribe from these at any time, for example, by clicking the unsubscribe link included on our emails. For more information about how Meta handles your data please read our Data Policy .
form origin
lead_source
optin__c
Campaign_ID
Subscribe
© 2026 Meta
About Developers Careers Privacy Cookies Terms Help Center
English (US) English (UK) Español Português (Brasil) Français (France) Español (España) More languages العربية Tiếng Việt Italiano Deutsch ภาษาไทย 中文(台灣) Čeština Dansk Ελληνικά Suomi Français (Canada) עברית हिन्दी Magyar Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 한국어 Bahasa Melayu Norsk (bokmål) Nederlands Polski Português (Portugal) Română Русский Svenska Türkçe 中文(简体) 中文(香港)
Log in to Meta for Business
Manage your ad accounts and get personalized support.
Log in with Facebook