Using no additional tool/skill — this is a self-contained creative-writing task, not a coding or debugging job, so I'm producing the treatment directly per the brief's own methodology.

```json
{
  "ideas": [
    {
      "truth": "We trust things that look considered — quality feels earned when we can see it, not just be told about it.",
      "moment": "The instant a well-made object is caught turning under a single light, revealing craftsmanship a flat photo couldn't show.",
      "key_frame": "Product held tight and off-center against a muted, soft-focus backdrop, one warm light just beginning to graze its edge."
    },
    {
      "truth": "Anticipation before a moment matters more than the moment itself.",
      "moment": "The last few seconds before someone reaches for it and walks out the door.",
      "key_frame": "Product resting at the edge of a dark surface, a long shadow creeping across the frame like a clock hand."
    },
    {
      "truth": "Stillness reads as confidence — things that don't need to shout feel expensive.",
      "moment": "A private, gallery-hushed pause where the object simply sits under changing light, saying nothing, needing nothing.",
      "key_frame": "Product centered on a plinth-like surface, dust motes drifting through a single shaft of light."
    }
  ],
  "chosen": 0,
  "why": "It turns the one static reference photo into a literal, filmable camera move (push + orbit + light sweep) that Veo can execute faithfully without inventing new product details, delivering 'premium, no people' in a single clean take.",
  "treatment": "We open close on the product, resting in soft, directional light against a muted backdrop — nothing else competes for attention. The camera begins a slow, deliberate push-in combined with a gentle orbit, as if walking around a piece kept behind glass. As it moves, the light shifts — a warm highlight travels across the surface, catching an edge, a curve, a reflection, revealing texture and craftsmanship one beat at a time. Faint dust motes drift through a background light shaft, barely visible, adding stillness and scale. The motion holds its breath at the midpoint, then eases to a final resting frame, product centered, light settled, calm. Sound is minimal: a low ambient hum, the whisper of air, a faint metal-glass tick as the highlight crosses the edge. No voice. No people.",
  "decisions": {
    "D1_idea": "The instant a beautifully made object is caught mid-turn under a single directed light, revealing its craftsmanship as if seen for the first time.",
    "D2_conflict": "No dramatic obstacle — the tension is the visual noise of the ordinary day, from which the object quietly separates itself as something worth stopping the scroll for.",
    "D3_roles": "The viewer is the one who must choose between the ordinary and the considered; the product is both hero and answer — no spokesperson or guide is needed.",
    "D4_opening": "Bold, close image: the product already in a tight, corner-weighted hold against a muted frame — an opening close-up, not mid-action.",
    "D5_brand": "Product is on screen for the full 8 seconds via one continuous shot; no logo/name was supplied, so any brand mark is reserved for the settled final frame in post (see finish notes).",
    "D6_ask_and_end": "No explicit CTA — none was requested. The film ends on the product, settled and centered, carried purely by picture (no voice, no text ask).",
    "D7_product_truth": "Only fact available: the product's form, color and material exactly as shown in the customer's attached photo (source: customer photo). No feature, use-case or claim is stated or implied beyond that.",
    "D8_deviations": "No brand name, logo or CTA copy included — none was supplied, and exact_copy is empty, so inventing any would fabricate a claim; left for a later post step if the client provides assets. Delivered as one 8-second scene (not multiple), matching Veo 3.1's one-scene-per-prompt guidance and the customer's single-reel ask."
  },
  "scenes": [
    {
      "n": 1,
      "prompt": "Cinematic macro product shot. Camera performs one continuous, tripod-smooth motion: a slow push-in combined with a gentle few-degree orbit around the product, held over the full 8 seconds. A single warm light sweeps across the product's surface in sync with the camera move, catching highlights on its edges and reflections at the midpoint, then the motion eases to a full stop, settling on a still, centered final frame as the light stabilizes. Setting: quiet, minimal studio space, soft falling shadows, shallow depth of field, faint dust motes drifting through a background light shaft. Ambience: premium, editorial, high-end product-film mood — low ambient room tone, a soft breathy hum, a faint delicate metal-glass tick at the moment the highlight crosses the product's edge around second 5. No voice, no people, no on-screen text.",
      "duration_s": 8,
      "references": ["photo1"],
      "spoken": "",
      "on_screen_copy": [],
      "first_frame_still_prompt": "Use the provided customer photo, unaltered, as the first frame — no re-generation or re-description of the product.",
      "S1_feeling": "Quiet admiration — calm awe at something well made.",
      "S2_first_frame": "Tight, corner-weighted close-up on the product against a muted backdrop, one light already grazing its edge — the 'worth a second look' idea is present from frame one, not built toward.",
      "S3_one_action": "One continuous push-in-with-orbit camera move plus a synced light sweep across the product, running the full 8 seconds and settling to stillness in the final beat.",
      "S4_new_information": "The viewer sees the object in the round — angles, edges and reflections the flat source photo alone couldn't show — which is the reason to move at all.",
      "S5_impact": "The payoff is the settle: light locks onto the product's most flattering edge and the frame goes still — legible on a silent, small phone scroll as 'this is made well.'"
    }
  ],
  "riskiest_scene": 1,
  "finish": {
    "copy_placement": "If a brand name/logo is later supplied, place it as a small, high-contrast lockup in the lower third over the final still 1–1.5s only, checked against the darkest patch of that frame, using the brand's own typeface for legibility per guidance.",
    "end_card": "Hold on the settled, centered product in its final resting light as the true end frame — no separate end card needed unless a logo is added in post.",
    "music": "Yes — a minimal, warm ambient bed with a sparse piano or synth pad, no beat, understated-luxury mood, swelling gently to the midpoint highlight and settling by the final frame."
  }
}
```