Use square and vertical video to engage mobile customers - Google Ads Help
Skip to main content
Google Ads Help
Help Center
Community
Announcements
Sign in
Google Help
Start advertising
Campaigns
Explore features
Optimize performance
Account & billing
Fix issues
Google Partners
Google Ads
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Submit feedback
Send feedback on...
This help content & information
General Help Center experience
Close
Next
Your guide to Google Ads
8 steps to prepare your campaign for success
Choose the right campaign type
Determine your advertising goals
How Google Ads can work for your industry
Google Ads specs: ad formats, sizes, and best practices
More advertising tools
Google Ads basics
Google Ads privacy
Glossary
Performance Max
AI Max for Search campaigns
AI Max for Shopping campaigns
Search campaigns
Display campaigns
Smart Campaigns
App campaigns
Shopping ads
Video campaigns
Hotel campaigns
Demand Gen campaigns
Call campaigns
Things to do
Events ticketing
Ads, assets & landing pages
Ad groups
Keywords
Bidding
Targeting
Measure results
Bulk uploads & edits
Campaign settings
12 tips to advertising with Google Ads
Google Ads Best Practices
Optimization features
Create effective Search ads
Generative AI tools in Google Ads
Improve with AI-powered Search
Finding success with Smart Bidding
Optimize performance with App Connect
Google Ads training on Skillshop
The Google Ads mobile app
Billing
Account settings
Account access
Manager accounts
Account security and safety
Cancel or reactivate your account
Working with client accounts
Useful tools
Ad disapprovals and reviews
Billing & payments
Compromised account issues
Policy issues
Performance issues
Account access issues
Reporting issues
Request implementation support for Google Ads and YouTube Reserve
Google Ads API
Google Partners Program
Setup and basics
Create ads and campaigns
Ad formats
Video ads
Use square and vertical video to engage mobile customers
Label assets that are AI edited or created
AI regulations in the European Union, India, and New York require that ads with certain AI-generated or edited assets include disclosures and/or labels that inform consumers that the ads were made with AI.
Add labels directly to your creatives or use the AI label setting in Google Ads, Display & Video 360, Campaign Manager 360, Merchant Center, and Ads Editor to add AI labels to your creatives. Learn more about how to
Use AI content label settings to label your ads
.
Notes
These labels will not be in violation of
Google policies prohibiting text overlays
and watermarks.
Use of the AI label setting in Google’s advertising products doesn't guarantee your compliance with specific regulations. Seek legal guidance and take measures as needed to
ensure your ads and assets follow all local legal obligations and policies
To better engage YouTube viewers on mobile devices, it's best to create a variety of different video creatives, including square and vertical videos, for your App, Video, and Performance Max campaigns.
Today's mobile video experience
The video player on the YouTube app automatically adjusts to the dimensions of your video. For example, if you want to show a vertical video, such as a 9:16 aspect ratio, your vertical video will appear larger than a horizontal video and will cover 75% of the screen with organic content beneath the video. If a user then selects the fullscreen button, the video will cover 100% of the screen when the device is held in portrait mode.
Benefits of square and vertical videos
Adding a vertical video asset to a Demand Gen campaign leads to more than 35% increase in conversions on Shorts.
Adding a vertical video to an ad group with only landscape videos to Video View Campaigns increases VTR on Shorts by over 40%.
Adding a vertical video to an ad group with only landscape videos to Video Reach Campaigns increases Viewability on Shorts by over 45% and average watchtime by 20%.
When viewers hold their phones in portrait mode, vertical videos provide advertisers with a larger canvas to deliver their product's message.
Source: Google internal data, Global 2024
Best practice: Diversify your video creatives
If you want your video ads to appear optimally across different devices, it's recommended to use different video ratios for Video and App campaigns:
Horizontal 16:9
Vertical 9:16
Square 1:1
Important
: Aspect ratios between these settings are allowed. On the YouTube app, the video player will automatically adjust to ratios between 16:9 and 9:16. Vertical videos, with a 9:16 aspect ratio, are best suited for the Shorts format and deliver better performance compared to landscape assets. Square videos are still recommended for App, Demand Gen and Performance Max campaigns.
Tip: Upload ads with different messages
For both App and Video campaigns, upload different versions of multiple videos across the recommended ratios. For example, you might upload multiple videos of each type (vertical, square, and horizontal), with each video having a different message. Run these assets in the same Video or App campaign.
Optimize your vertical video
The video player on the YouTube app will automatically adapt video dimensions to the player, whether your video is square, vertical, or horizontal.
Safe zones for vertical video ads on YouTube
Vertical video ads may show up on in-stream, in-feed, and YouTube Shorts across mobile, desktop, or TV screens for Performance Max, App, and Demand Gen campaigns. For Video Reach and Video View campaigns, vertical ads may show up on all surfaces and devices listed above except in-feed; Video Reach and Video campaign will not show vertical ads on in-feed.
Overlays, call-to-actions, and buttons may appear in different places depending on the format, campaign type, and screen.
Use this image as a reference to ensure important elements like your logo, product, supers, and others are within the red safe area to avoid risk of elements being covered within certain inventory.
Note
: When a mobile device is rotated and held horizontally after a vertical video ad has played, the vertical video ad would appear with black bars to either side of the video.
How different videos appear on the YouTube app
Vertical video on initial video impression
The image below shows how a vertical video appears in various video player modes.
At left: How a vertical video appears if the viewer engages fullscreen mode.
At center: The portion of a 9:16 vertical video that is cropped for the initial ad impression.
At right: How the video ad appears upon ad impression.
Square video on initial video impression
The image below shows how a square video appears in different video player modes.
At left: How a square video appears when the viewer engages fullscreen mode.
At center: Cropping behavior (none).
Viewer engagement with the YouTube app
For both square and vertical videos, when the user interacts with the YouTube app, such as by scrolling through related content under the video, the video player can compress up to a 1:1 aspect ratio. This will crop the displayed video at the bottom and top and allow the user to interact with the content they chose below.
Vertical-friendly video ads
Optimize your App, Performance Max, and Video campaigns by having vertical videos in your creative assets as a best practice. The mobile-friendly, full-screen experience of vertical videos can help improve your campaign’s engagement with mobile video viewers.
For YouTube, vertical videos are supported in all video eligible campaigns with possible placements in-feed, in-stream, on YouTube Search, and YouTube Shorts.
Outside of YouTube, your ads also run on
Google video partners
to reach more people. A large share of Google video partners inventory is vertical-focused, like gaming and video apps, to further utilize your vertical and square video assets.
To start creating vertical video assets, learn more about
video creation in Google Ads
: Campaigns may not serve if they only have vertical videos as these assets will no longer serve in our YouTube in-feed environments, like, YouTube homepage feed, YouTube Search results feed, and Watch Next feed).
Review your performance
When you have square and vertical videos, you should review your ad performance, bids, budgets and inventory to maximize performance. For square and vertical videos, the 2 metrics "Viewable Rate" and "Viewable Impressions" reflect the viewability of the video player, unlike most video traffic, where the metrics reflect the viewability of the creative. This distinction may meaningfully impact figures for these 2 metrics.
Related links
Make better creative assets for App campaigns
About video ad formats
Tips for optimizing your video campaign
Was this helpful?
How can we improve it?
Submit
Need more help?
Try these next steps:
Post to the help community
Get answers from community members
Contact us
Tell us more and we’ll help you get there
false
1 of 6
About targeting for Video campaigns
2 of 6
Add targeting to your Video campaigns
3 of 6
How to preview your video ads
4 of 6
About video ad sequencing
5 of 6
6 of 6
About reservation: Reserved media placements on YouTube
Reach your marketing goals with Google Ads
Google Ads can help you make the most of your online marketing efforts with tools to help you succeed. Learn more from success stories to see what others have achieved with the help of the right campaigns for their goals.
Get Started
or Call 1-855-500-2754 to get started
©2026 Google
Google Ads Advertising Policies
About the Help Center
Enable Dark Mode
Language
català‎
dansk‎
Deutsch‎
eesti‎
English (Australia)‎
English (United Kingdom)‎
español‎
español (Latinoamérica)‎
Filipino‎
français‎
hrvatski‎
Indonesia‎
italiano‎
latviešu‎
lietuvių‎
magyar‎
Melayu‎
Nederlands‎
norsk‎
polski‎
português‎
português (Brasil)‎
română‎
slovenčina‎
slovenščina‎
suomi‎
svenska‎
Tiếng Việt‎
Türkçe‎
čeština‎
Ελληνικά‎
български‎
русский‎
српски‎
українська‎
‏
עברית
العربية
हिन्दी‎
ไทย‎
中文（简体）‎
中文（繁體）‎
中文（香港）‎
日本語‎
한국어‎
English‎
Search
Clear search
Close search
Google apps
Main menu
15255320015652572197
true
Search Help Center
73067