SOURCE: https://www.facebook.com/business/ads-guide/update/video/facebook-facebook-reels?locale=en_US
TITLE: Awareness Video Ad Specs on Facebook Reels | Facebook Ads Guide
FETCHED (UTC): 2026-09-20T18:19Z via the Claude browser pane (rendered page; curl -> HTTP 400). Text below is the rendered main-content innerText, copied verbatim. Full html not saved (served only to a browser session).
---
Facebook Reels enables people, creators and businesses to create entertaining short-form videos and share them with their followers. Reels ads provide an immersive, built-for-mobile opportunity to connect and reach audiences seeking entertainment.

You can use the video format in Reels ads to help tell your brand story in ways that are unique and authentic. Whether it's participating in trending moments through challenges or using educational tutorials to highlight products and inspire people, you should experiment with different types of video ads to discover what resonates with the community.

These fullscreen vertical video ads will be inserted in between organic Reels content. Similar to organic Reels, people can comment, like, view, save, share and skip ads. Reels ads can surface in the most popular places to access Reels content. Once someone taps into a Reel from Feed or Reels tab, they will be launched into a viewing panel that exclusively shows Reels that scroll vertically.

Consider leaving roughly 14% of the top, 35% of the bottom, and 6% on each side of your asset free from text, logos, or other key creative elements to avoid cropping key elements or covering them with the profile icon or call-to-action. To learn more, visit our guidance on text overlays and safe zones.

Design Recommendations
File Type: MP4, MOV, GIF
Recommended Ratio: 9:16 
Video Settings: H.264 compression, square pixels, fixed frame rate, progressive scan and stereo AAC audio compression at 128kbps+
Resolution: 1440 x 2560 pixels
Video Captions: Optional, but recommended 
Video Sound: Optional, but strongly recommended

Videos should not contain edit lists in file containers.

Text Recommendations
Primary Text: 40 characters 
Headline Text: 55 characters 
Support for auto captioning: No
Technical Requirements
Video Duration: No maximum limit.
Maximum File Size: 4GB
Things to avoid
Special boxes: No
