Chapter Four
Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the
Editing Process
QUESTION: What is “shooting for editing?”
ANSWER: During production, when you are recording all of the visual material for a
project, you make sure that your shots cover all of the action from each angle required
so that when it comes time to edit the individual shots together, there is enough visual
material to show the entire story from the preferred positions of coverage.

It is extremely important to remember that creating and recording all of the shots discussed so far is only one part of the visual storytelling process. While you are shooting,
you are in production, but once you are done recording all of your motion images,
the project moves into a phase called postproduction or the editing process. What
does this mean for you, the camera person or director? It means everything. All the hard
work that you do achieving your well-planned shots during production really only serves
to enhance the abilities of the people who are doing the postproduction work—the picture and sound editors. They are tasked with assembling all of your shots, whatever
they may be, and creating the best documentary, news report, music video, commercial, or feature ﬁlm that they can. To learn more about the editing process, feel free to
review the contents of our companion text, Grammar of the Edit.
The responsibility of generating and maintaining the overall visual quality of the work is
set on the shoulders of the production team (director, DP, camera operator, etc.). There
is a certain degree of psychic ability required for this task because it becomes your job
to prethink the needs of the edit team, shoot the appropriate coverage of the material,
and deliver the variety of shots that will best show the story. This is called shooting
with editing in mind. What will the editor need to cut to at this point? What would the
audience like to see next? How can this information be shown at its best? What shot
framing will not confuse the viewer? Etc. Etc. Etc.
So far we have only focused on relatively simple shots, single subjects in CU, MS, LS,
and so forth. The simple goal of each of these shot types is to present visual information to the audience. The LS shows full action and environment, the MS provides
immediately discernible information, and the CU highlights very detailed information.

94 Grammar of the Shot

By recording a variety of these shot types, you provide the editor with more choices.
The editor can then decide more freely at what point the viewing audience will desire
fresh information and how much or how little information to show. A cut to a new shot
type gives that new information. A scene is created when the editor stitches together
all of the important information found in each of your shot types and the audience has
absorbed all that it can from the material that you originally provided during production.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 95

Matching Your Shots in a Scene

FIGURE 4.1 The evolution of a motion picture’s building blocks.

Matching Your Shots in a Scene

The individual shots you create on set will not live in a void and they will not, most
likely, stand alone as independent motion images. In the end, they will work with one
another, intercut with one another, so that an entire visual story is told. The shots cut
together to make a scene, the scenes cut together to make an ACT, and the acts cut
together to make an entire motion picture. Production can span days, weeks, or months
of real time, but the resulting images, when edited together, need to appear as though
they were all captured at the same exact time with ﬂuid movement and matching
actions. Consistency is therefore very important and we have a few ways to help stay
aware of the potential glitches (Figure 4.1).

96 Grammar of the Shot

Continuity
When producing a ﬁctional narrative work, and there is a person or event to be
recorded, you will most likely run through the action several times, recording each pass
from a different angle and with a different shot type in your camera setup. This is called
shooting coverage. You “cover” the main action from several angles and with several
different framings. The ultimate goal, of course, is to make sure that the viewing audience is able to watch the entire action or delivery of dialogue from beginning to end.
The editor is allowed to choose when to cut from one shot to the next, and engages the
audience by providing them with a variety of coverage.
Having the actors repeat the same action or dialogue from shot to shot requires that
you pay attention to continuity, which is consistent repetition of movement, action,
or dialogue by the talent from one camera setup to the next. Keep in mind that each
action and line of dialogue delivery are also repeated within each unique camera setup
or shot, recorded as individual units called takes. Your goal will be to record as few
“takes” as possible to get the action or dialogue correct and usable for the editor,
saving time and money, but still getting the coverage you, and the editor, will need.
However, continuity is not just making sure an actor moves his hand the same way in
each take of each shot. Continuity, on a visual story construction level, involves a much
wider range of planning as well.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 97

Continuity of Screen Direction

The frame that conﬁnes your selected shot type actually helps keep your audience sure
of the location. As we know, the camera occupies the “fourth wall,” allowing the
audience a privileged view of locations and actions within the ﬁlm’s “space.” The top,
bottom, left, and right edges of the frame therefore become references of direction for
the audience. The character looks off frame left—the car drives away and exits frame
right. The viewer associates the directional attention of a character or the movement of
subjects in the ﬁlm world to the edges of the frame. It should be clear then that screen
direction—the left or right movement of a subject—must be maintained from one
shot to the next. Figures 4.3 through 4.5 should help illustrate the concept of continuity
of screen direction.
The audience member viewing these recorded actions on the screen (Figures 4.3 to 4.5)
assumes that there is a larger “ﬁlm world” beyond the conﬁnes of the four edges of the
frame. Because this ﬁlm space exists in its own version of reality, the rules of physical

FIGURE 4.2 The motion picture frame has four edges and corresponding areas of interest: frame left, frame right,
top of frame, and bottom of frame.

Continuity of Screen Direction

We all know that the rectangular screen upon which we watch a motion picture is not
the place where the actions are actually taking place. Movies can pretty much be shot
anywhere and in any direction, yet to the viewing audience, that screen is their one
window onto the world of the ﬁlm. As a result, the ﬁlmmakers have a responsibility
to the audience to present a knowable world that conforms to some constant, physical world rules such as up, down, left, right, near, far, and so forth such that when the
audience watches the motion picture they do not get confused spatially. The horizon
line mentioned in Chapter Three is a helpful clue, but there are other ways that you can
keep your audience grounded (Figure 4.2).

98 Grammar of the Shot

FIGURE 4.3 Action shows a person walking toward and exiting frame left.

FIGURE 4.4 Holding on empty frame for a bit just after the person has exited.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 99

movement must be obeyed as in reality—if a person moves away to the left they must
keep moving away to the left until we see some change in the movement happen on
screen. That is, if during a shot, a person walks out of frame left, you could assume a
continuance of movement in that direction until the next shot picks up their ongoing
journey. The character’s leftward motion, however, dictates that in this new shot they
would have to be entering from frame right in order to maintain that direction of leftward movement within the ﬁlm’s space.

Continuity of Screen Direction

FIGURE 4.5 Cut to new shot of the same person continuing their walk, but this time they are entering the shot
from frame right. Action follows a continuity of screen direction.

100 Grammar of the Shot

The Line—Basis for Screen Direction
Not all screen direction is based on large, physical movements. A good deal of important
narrative information and spatial relationship data can be discerned by the viewing audience just through their observation of the directions of attention. Most often, each subject within the ﬁlm space pays attention to some other subject or object within the same
ﬁlm space. The child looks after a lost balloon (Figure 4.6)—the dog looks at the burglar
(Figure 4.7)—the hungry man looks at the pie in the baker’s window (Figure 4.8). The

FIGURE 4.6 The child’s attention follows the ascending balloon. A line is created.

FIGURE 4.7 The dog looks in the direction of the intruder. A line is created.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 101

FIGURE 4.8 The hungry man eyes the baker’s fresh pie. A line is created.

The Line—Basis for Screen Direction

audience is keen on observing these attentions and, as a result, uses these connections
between people and people, people and objects, and so on to establish lines of direction, which are also called sight lines. Good ﬁlmmakers know that an audience desires
these connections, wants to follow these lines of attention, and uses this phenomenon
to help establish narrative meaning and shot composition and to reinforce spatial relationships within the ﬁlm space.

102 Grammar of the Shot

The Imaginary Line—The 180 Degree Rule
The lines of attention need to be understood, established, and respected by the production team. As the audience relies upon these to receive and maintain spatial cues,
it is very important that they remain consistent throughout the editing of a scene. To
help maintain lines of attention and screen direction from shot to shot there is a popular ﬁlmmaker’s concept known by several names: 180 degree line, imaginary line,
action line, or axis of action. As some of the names imply, it is an imaginary line
drawn through the shooting location, roughly where all of the main action occurs, and it
is established by tracing the sight line of the talent within the shot (Figure 4.9).
This concept’s other name, the 180 degree rule, will surely help clarify how this all
works the way it does and why it is so important. Much like we discussed the horizontal camera angle circling around your stationary subject back in Chapter Two, we will
once again imagine that your subject(s) is at the center of a large circle. For your ﬁrst
shot, the camera is once again positioned at the outer ring of the circle facing in toward
the center where your action is occurring. Now superimpose in your mind the action
line cutting across the diameter of the circle from frame left to frame right (Figure 4.10).
Once you have established this ﬁrst line, it pretty much stays locked in place, but there are
ways to alter it while shooting coverage. Of course, to get other shots of your subjects you
will have to move the camera around the ﬁlm space, but now you will have to respect this
initial axis of action. The line has cut an arc out of the imaginary circle that is 180 degrees
around from side to side. Your camera must now operate within that 180 degree arc when
you set up for your new camera angles and coverage shots (Figure 4.11).

FIGURE 4.9 Overhead of 180
degree line along the axis of action.

FIGURE 4.10 Bird’s-eye view
of the action line.

FIGURE 4.11 Keep your camera setups within the 180 degree arc on the
near side of the established action line.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 103

The Imaginary Line—The 180 Degree Rule

The ﬁrst shot establishes frame left and frame right and also establishes the lines of
attention throughout the ﬁlm space. Character A is talking with character B. A is sitting
frame left and his sight lines are pointing frame left to frame right. B is sitting frame
right (receiving A’s attention) and is looking back at A (sending sight lines from frame
right to frame left). When you frame your shot for a single CU of A you would need
to maintain screen direction and continuity. A is still frame left with attention pointing frame right (even though B is no longer physically visible within the frame). Cutting
back to B in her CU would necessitate a similar treatment. B is framed toward the right,
looking out frame left. The series of shots and overhead diagrams in Figure 4.12 should
help solidify this practice.

FIGURE 4.12 Respecting the imaginary line and staying within the 180 degree arc will result in correct continuity
of screen direction across the shots of this dialogue scene.

104 Grammar of the Shot

“Jumping the Line”
It does happen from time to time, but most ﬁlmmakers do not notice it until they get
into the editing process. To “jump the line” or “cross the line” means that you
placed the camera on the opposite side of the action line and recorded coverage shots
from the wrong side of the 180 degree arc—effectively reversing the established directions of left and right and inverting the ﬁlm space on the unaware viewer. In the series
of shots shown in Figure 4.13, the ﬁrst two are repeated from our example given earlier,
but the third shot is taken, by mistake, from the far side of the arc. The result is a nice

FIGURE 4.13 Only when edited together does one see the incorrect screen direction of character B’s attention in
the close-up. The camera had jumped the axis of action.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 105

CU of character B, but the real mistake is not apparent until the three shots are edited
together. B’s screen direction and line of attention are reversed and therefore the cuts
make no sense because it now appears that both A and B are sitting in the same fashion looking off frame right, not looking back and forth at one another as established in
the wider two shot.

“Jumping the Line”

Crossing the line is acceptable under certain circumstances, which are explored in more
detail in Chapter Six. For now, just think of how you would have to cover a couple slow
dancing cheek to cheek on a dance ﬂoor. You would have one face on one side of a
head and the other face on the opposite side, with the axis of action cutting through
each. In order to see both faces, you would have to cross the line to set up your shot.
As you may have picked up by now, there are very few absolutes when it comes to the
guidelines and “rules” presented in this text. Remember, if you have creative reasons to
execute a certain shot or group of shots a certain way, then do it, even if it ﬂies in the
face of convention.

106 Grammar of the Shot

The 30 Degree Rule
Grounded in the execution of the 180 degree rule is another important guideline called
the 30 degree rule. Simply put, when you are seeking various angles on action for a
variety of shot types within your 180 degree arc, you should ideally move the camera
at least 30 degrees around the semicircle before you begin to frame up a new shot of
the same subject. The angle of view or perspective on the same subjects is considered
“different enough” when the camera is moved away from the previous setup by at least
30 degrees. Because each shot or view of the action is supposed to show new information to the audience, it makes sense that you would not wish to create two separate
coverage shots that are too similar to one another. Following this 30 degree rule can
help prevent this similarity in repeated shots when the edit process is underway. This
will avoid what is known as a jump cut—two shots with similar framing of the same
object cut together causing a visual jump in either space or time within the ﬁlm’s world
(Figures 4.14 and 4.15).

FIGURE 4.14 A 180 degree arc from the action line broken down into 30 degree slices.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 107

The 30 Degree Rule

FIGURE 4.15 The same subjects as seen through the camera at ﬁve 30 degree slices around the 180 degree arc.
This maintains the action line and achieves a new angle on action appropriate for the edit.

108 Grammar of the Shot

Reciprocating Imagery
Our recent example of shots cutting from a wider two-shot to two singles in a medium
close-up serves well to illustrate our next point. Whenever you shoot one type of shot
to cover one character in a scene you should create the exact same corresponding
frame for the other character in the scene. They call this matching shots or reciprocating imagery (Figure 4.16).
Tradition holds that an editor might normally show a scene from the outside in, where
the shots of the action start off wider to show environment and characters and then,
as the action progresses, cut together tighter and closer shots in order to show more
intimate detail by the end. Each new camera setup with new framing should match
for object size and object placement. Of course, you may have to make allowances for
actual subject size, hairstyle, hat, or other accessories that may require slightly different framing. Your main goal, however, will be to provide the editor with equal numbers
of shots and matching framing for each character. When it comes time to cut, he or she
can progress along shot size or type from one character to the next.
The same can be said for the camera angle itself. Generally speaking, when you cover two
separate characters with single shots from the same scene, you should take care to match
the camera height, camera lens angle (tilted up or down or neutral), and overall camera

FIGURE 4.16 Shooting matching shots for medium close-up coverage is best. Providing an editor with an MCU of
one character but only a BCU of the other may cause issues during the edit. The shot types do not match.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 109

angle on action. Of course, because you must take your storytelling needs into account,
not every aspect may match exactly. The overall camera angle on action, though, is tied in
with the 180 degree rule and the associated geometry really helps keep everything organized. If you shoot character A from a 45 degree angle around your 180 degree arc, then
you should swing the camera around to the other end of your arc and shoot character B
from a corresponding 45 degree angle. Provided that you keep the same camera height
and lens focal length, you should be able to easily generate the reciprocating image of the
second character that matches the framing of the ﬁrst shot (Figures 4.17 and 4.18).

FIGURE 4.17 Camera setup 1 records MS of character A from 45 degrees on the arc. Camera setup 2 records MS
of character B from ⫺45 degrees on the opposite side of the same arc.

FIGURE 4.18

The resulting matching MS shots of characters A and B.

Reciprocating Imagery

When two subjects appear in the same frame, the same matching shot rules apply. For
example, the over-the-shoulder shot allows the audience to keep track of the physical
placement of each character in the scene. Lines of attention and screen direction are
still required to maintain spatial relations. When you establish a frame that favors character A’s face, you include a portion of the backside of character B’s head and shoulder.

110 Grammar of the Shot

For consistency in editing purposes, the reverse shot, favoring character B’s face, must
also be recorded. The audience will often expect that reverse shot to be matching in
subject size, subject composition, camera height, angle on action, and so forth, unless
you are providing purposefully altered framing for storytelling reasons. When cutting
from one OTS to another, any differences in these image factors will be very apparent
and the mismatch will cause your audience, perhaps just on a subconscious level, to
have an unfavorable reaction to the scene (Figures 4.19 and 4.20).

FIGURE 4.19 Matching over-the-shoulder shots for characters A and B.

FIGURE 4.20 Mismatching over-the-shoulder shots for characters A and B. Note how the subjects framing, size,
and angle are not consistent.

Chapter Four | Putting Your Shots Together: Prethinking the Editing Process 111

Eye-Line Match
Another important notion associated with shooting for editing is the concept of eyeline match. This takes the line of attention or sight line from one shot and ties it
directly with an object in a new shot after a transition. Eye-line match usually involves
a character isolated within a frame (perhaps illustrated most easily with an MS or an
MCU shot) when their attention is directed somewhere outside the four edges of that
frame. The audience traces an imaginary line from the character’s eyes to the edge of
the frame where they are looking.
The ﬁlmmaker, most often, is then obliged to have to show the audience what the character is looking at. The next shot should be that object of interest revealed to the audience. And it’s not just revealed in some arbitrary shot. It should be shot from a similar
direction, angle, and height that closely match what the perspective would be from the
vantage point of the character observing the object in the ﬁrst shot. This does not have
to be a direct, subjective POV shot, but it does have to maintain and respect the eyeline established with the observing character so that the audience feels adequately
informed that they, too, are seeing the same object as the character in the ﬁlm.

Eye-Line Match

Eye-line match is a “setup and then payoff” scenario maker. The ﬁrst shot sets up an
expectation and then the second shot fulﬁlls that expectation. The important thing is to
frame the second shot from a corresponding vantage point so that the illusion of connection and character association is made by the audience (Figure 4.21).

112 Grammar of the Shot

FIGURE 4.21 The ﬁrst shot sets up the subject and the eye-line of interest. The second shot, presented from a
correspondingly subjective viewpoint, reveals the object of interest.

End of Chapter Four Review
1. The shots you create must be edited together so plan for that process.
2. Watch for continuity of action in performance.
3. Maintain continuity of screen direction from one shot to another.
4. Let the line of attention connect objects for the audience.
5. Use sight lines and the action line to maintain proper screen direction while
shooting coverage for a scene.
6. Move the camera at least 30 degrees (or more) around your shooting arc and
change your focal length so no two shots of coverage seem to come from the
same angle on action.
7. Always match your shots for framing, angle, focal length, and so on when
shooting a multicharacter scene, unless you have a creative motivation to do
otherwise.
8. An eye-line match keeps your audience informed and grounded. Expectations are
set up in one shot and paid off in the next.

