 
 
 
 index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The next step is to create drawings. Some 
 typeface is an enormous task. However, for people 
 designers start with pencil before working digitally, with a knack for drawing letterforms, the process is 
 while others build their letterforms directly with font hugely rewarding. 
 castaways Drawing and finished type, 2001. Art and type direction: Andy Cruz. Typeface design: Ken Barber/House Industries . Font engineering: Rich Roat. House Industries is a digital type foundry that creates original typefaces inspired by popular culture and design history. Designer Ken Barber makes pencil drawings by hand and then digitizes the outlines. Castaways is from a series of typefaces based on commercial signs from Las Vegas. The shapes of the letters recall the handpainted strokes made by traditional sign painters and lettering artists. 
 76 | thinking with type 
 
 
 type design seeks a balance between sameness and difference mercury bold Page proof and screen shot, 2003. Design: Jonathan Hoefler/Hoefler &amp; Frere-Jones . Mercury is a typeface designed for modern newspapers, whose production demands fast, high-volume printing on cheap paper. The typeface’s bullet-proof letterforms feature chunky serifs and sturdy upright strokes. The notes marked on the proof below comment on everything from the width or weight of a letter to the size and shape of a serif. Many such proofs are made during the design process. In a digital typeface, each letterform consists of a series of curves and lines controlled by points. In a large type family, different weights and widths can be made automatically by interpolating between extremes such as light and heavy or narrow and wide. The designer then adjusts each variant to ensure legibility and visual consistency. 
 letter | 77 
 EXERCISE 
 Create a prototype for a bitmap typeface by 
 designing letters on a grid of squares or a grid 
 of dots. Substitute the curves and diagonals of 
 traditional letterforms with gridded and 
 rectilinear elements. Avoid making detailed 
 “staircases,” which are just curves and 
 diagonals in disguise. This exercise looks back 
 to the 1910s and 1920s, when avant-garde 
 designers made experimental typefaces out of 
 Wendy Neese 
 simple geometric parts. The project also speaks 
 to the structure of digital technologies, from 
 cash register receipts and LED signs to 
 on-screen font display, showing that a typeface 
 is a system of elements. 
 Brendon McClean 
 Bruce Willen 
 James Alvarez 
 Examples of student work from 
 Maryland Institute College of Art 
 Joey Potts 
 78 | thinking with type 
 bitmap forms amplify the systematic quality of typography Becky Slogeris 
 Bryan Connor 
 Virginia Sasser 
 Julia Kim 
 Michelle Ghiotti 
 letter | 79 
 FONT 
 Where do fonts come from, and why are there so 
 postscript/type 1 was developed for desktop computer 
 many different formats? Some come loaded with 
 systems in the 1980s by Adobe. Type I fonts are output using the PostScript programming language, created for generating your computer’s operating system, while others 
 high-resolution images on paper or film. A Type 1 font consists are bundled with software packages. A few of these of two files: a screen font and a printer font. You must install widely distributed typefaces are of the highest 
 both files in order to fully use these fonts. 
 quality, such as Adobe Garamond Pro and Hoefler truetype is a later font format, created by Apple and Microsoft Text, while others (including Comic Sans, Apple 
 for use with their operating systems. TrueType fonts are easier Chancery, and Papyrus) are reviled by design 
 to install than Type 1 fonts because they consist of a single font snobs everywhere. 
 file rather than two. 
 If you want to expand your vocabulary beyond 
 opentype, a format developed by Adobe, works on multiple this familiar fare, you will need to purchase fonts 
 platforms. Each file supports up to 65,000 characters, allowing from digital type foundries. These range from 
 multiple styles and character variations to be contained in a single font file. In a TrueType or Type 1 font, small capitals, large establishments like Adobe and FontShop, 
 alternate ligatures, and other special characters must be which license thousands of different typefaces, 
 contained in separate font files (sometimes labelled “Expert”); to independent producers that distribute just a 
 in an OpenType font they are part of the main font. These few, such as Underware in the Netherlands or 
 expanded character sets can also include accented letters and other special glyphs needed for typesetting a variety of Jeremy Tankard Typography in the U.K. You can 
 languages. OpenType fonts with expanded character sets are also learn to make your own fonts as well as find 
 commonly labeled “Pro.” OpenType fonts also automatically fonts that are distributed for free online. 
 adjust the position of hyphens, brackets, and parentheses for letters set in all-capitals. 
 The different font formats reflect technical 
 innovations and business arrangements developed 
 {[(HALF-BAKED?)]} 
 over time. Older font formats are still generally 
 scala, PostScript/Type 1 font format 
 usable on modern operating systems. 
 {[(HALF-BAKED?)]} 
 scala pro, OpenType font format 
 £ § ¥ ¼ ½ ¾ é ë ì å small caps and old-style 
 numerals, where are you 
 ã â á ý ø å ë ð ñ ò þ hiding? 
 NERD 
 through the Type&gt;OpenType options menu or other 
 ÿ ą ą ě ę ġ ģ ǆ ƶ ž ž OpenType layout tool in your design software. Small caps will not appear as a style variant in the Font menu, because OpenType treats them as part of the main font. 
 ő ģ ġ į į ĭ † ‡ ☜ ☞ 
 With any font, you can view all the special characters through the Type and Tables&gt;Glyphs menu. You will 
 scala pro, OpenType font, designed by Martin Majoor, 2005. Scala find many unexpected elements, including swashes, 
 Pro has numerous special characters for typesetting diverse European ligatures, ornaments, fractions, and more. Double click languages. You can access these characters using the Glyphs palette a glyph to insert it into to your text frame. 
 in InDesign. 
 80 | thinking with type 
 
 
 
 don’t get caught with your fonts down 
 save yourself some embarrassment 
 and learn to use these commonly 
 abused terms correctly. 
 TYPEFACE 
 A typeface is the design of the letterforms; a font is the delivery mechanism. 
 In metal type, the design is embodied in the punches from which molds are made. A font consists of the cast metal printing types. In digital systems, the typeface is the visual design, while the font is the software that allows you to install, access, and output the design. A single typeface might be available in several font formats. In part because the design of digital typefaces and the production of fonts are so fluidly linked today, most people use the terms interchangeably. Type nerds insist, however, on using them precisely. 
 
 CHARACTER 
 Type designers distinguish characters from glyphs in order to comply with Unicode, an international system for identifying all of the world’s recognized writing systems. Only a symbol with a unique function is considered a character and is thus assigned a code point in Unicode. A single character, such as a lowercase a , can be embodied by several different glyphs (a, a , a). 
 Each glyph is a specific expression of a given character. 
 
 2OMAN 
 The Roman Empire is a proper noun and thus is capitalized, but we identify roman letterforms, like italic ones, in lowercase. The name of the Latin alphabet is capitalized. 
 letter | 81 
 FONT 
 FREE 
 Who is the user of a typeface? In the end, the user Most of the FREE FONTS found on the Internet have is the reader. But before a set of letters can find 
 poor spacing and incomplete character sets. Many 
 their way onto the cover of a book or the back of 
 are stolen property distributed without consent. The a cereal box, they must pass through the hands of 
 fonts displayed here, however, are freely given by their creators. A typeface comes to life and finds a voice as another user: the graphic designer. 
 people begin to use it. 
 Digital fonts are easy to copy, alter, and 
 fontin, designed by Jos Buivenga/Ex Ljbris, 2004 
 distribute, but when you purchase a font, you 
 accept an end user license agreement (EULA) that limits how you can use it. Intellectual property law 
 in the United States protects the font as a piece 
 of software (a unique set of vector points), but it 
 does not protect the visual design of the typeface. 
 Thus it is a violation of standard EULAs to copy 
 a digital font and share it with other people (your 
 friends, your clients, or your Uncle Bob). It is 
 audimat, designed by Jack Usine/SMeltery.net, 2003 
 also illegal to open a font file in FontLab, add new 
 glyphs or alter some of its characters, and save the Some fonts are distributed freely in order to preserve font under a new name or under its trademarked 
 UNFAMILIAR traditions. Disseminating a historic revival name. In additon to having economic concerns, 
 at no cost to users encourages a broader understanding typeface designers worry about their work being 
 of history. Reviving typefaces is a DEEP-ROOTED 
 corrupted as users edit their fonts and then share 
 practice. Why should one creator claim ownership of another’s work? Who controls the past? 
 them with other people. 
 antykwa poltawskiego, designed by Adam Półtawski, Most EULAs do allow you to alter the outlines 
 1920s–1930s; digitized by Janusz Marian Nowacki, 1996 
 of a font for use in a logo or headline, however, 
 as long as you do not alter the software itself. It is SOME FREE FONTS are produced for underserved 
 also legal to create new digital versions of printed 
 linguistic communities for whom few typefaces are type specimens. For example, you could print 
 available. Still others are created by people who want out an alphabet in Helvetica, redraw the letters, 
 to participate in the open source movement . The OFL 
 digitize them with font design software, and 
 (Open Font License) permits users to alter a typeface release your own bespoke edition of Helvetica. 
 and contribute to its ongoing evolution. 
 If nothing else, this laborious exercise would 
 gentium Open Font License, designed by Victor Gaultney, 2001 
 teach you the value of a well-designed typeface. 
 A broadly usable typeface includes numerous 
 to participate in a viable, diverse ecology of content (journalism, design, art, typography, and more), 
 weights, styles, and special characters as well as 
 everyone has to pay . but perhaps everyone shouldn’t a strong underlying design. Fonts are expensive 
 have to pay for everything . If some resources are because they are carefully crafted products. 
 willingly given away, the result is a richer world. 
 ofl sorts mill goudy, revival of Frederic W. Goudy’s Goudy Old Style, 1916, designed by Barry Schwartz, 2010; distributed by the League of Moveable Type 
 82 | thinking with type 
 everyone has to pay, but everyone shouldn’t have to pay for everything league gothic, designed by the League of Moveable Type, 2009; revival of Morris Fuller Benton’s alternate gothic no.1. , released by American Type Founders Company (ATF) in 1903. 
 downcome, designed by Eduardo Recife/ Misprinted Type, 2002 
 
 shortcut, designed by Eduardo Recife, 2003 
 
 Minou Drouet 
 was a French 
 child poet 
 and composer dirty ego, designed by Eduardo Recife, 2001 
 widely derided 
 by intellectuals 
 in the 1950s. 
 
 
 misproject, designed by Eduardo Recife, 2001 
 text : Roland Barthes, “Myth Today,” 1957; translated by Annette Lavers. 
 letter | 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [ TEXT ] 
 
 cyberspace and civil 
 society Poster, 1996. 
 Designer: Hayes Henderson. 
 Rather than represent 
 cyberspace as an ethereal grid, 
 the designer has used blotches 
 of overlapping text to build an 
 ominous, looming body. 
 
 TEXT 
 letters gather into words, words build into sentences. In typography, 
 “text” is defined as an ongoing sequence of words, distinct from shorter headlines or captions. The main block is often called the “body,” comprising the principal mass of content. Also known as “running text,” it can flow from one page, column, or box to another. Text can be viewed as a thing—a sound and sturdy object—or a fluid poured into the containers of page or screen. Text can be solid or liquid, body or blood. 
 As body, text has more integrity and wholeness than the elements that surround it, from pictures, captions, and page numbers to banners, buttons, and menus. Designers generally treat a body of text consistently, letting it appear as a coherent substance that is distributed across the spaces of a document. In digital media, long texts are typically broken into chunks that can be accessed by search engines or hypertext links. Contemporary designers and writers produce content for various contexts, from the pages of print to an array of software environments, screen conditions, and digital devices, each posing its own limits and opportunities. 
 Designers provide ways into—and out of—the flood of words by breaking up text into pieces and offering shortcuts and alternate routes through masses of information. From a simple indent (signaling the entrance to a new idea) to a highlighted link (announcing a jump to another location), typography helps readers navigate the flow of content. The user could be searching for a specific piece of data or struggling to quickly process a volume of content in order to extract elements for immediate use. 
 Although many books define the purpose of typography as enhancing the readability of the written word, one of design’s most humane functions is, in actuality, to help readers avoid reading. 
 text | 87 
 
 hand-crafted corrections 
 psalter-hours English 
 manuscript, thirteenth 
 century. Walters Ms. W.102, 
 fol. 33v. Collection of the 
 Walters Art Museum, 
 Baltimore. The monk is 
 climbing up the side of the page 
 to replace a piece of faulty text 
 with the corrected line in the 
 bottom margin. 
 88 | thinking with type 
 
 ERRORS 
 Typography helped seal the literary notion of “the text” as a complete, original work, a stable body of ideas expressed in an essential form. Before the invention of printing, handwritten documents were riddled with errors. 
 Copies were copied from copies, each with its own glitches and gaps. 
 Scribes devised inventive ways to insert missing lines into manuscripts in order to salvage and repair these laboriously crafted objects. 
 Printing with movable type was the first system of mass production, Marshall McLuhan, 
 replacing the hand-copied manuscript. As in other forms of mass The Gutenberg Galaxy 
 production, the cost of manufacturing (setting type, insuring its correctness, (Toronto: University of 
 Toronto Press, 1962). 
 and running a press) drops for each unit as the size of the print run increases. Labor and capital are invested in tooling and preparing the technology, rather than in making the individual unit. The printing system allows editors and authors to correct a work as it passes from handwritten manuscript to typographic galley. “Proofs” are test copies made before final production begins. The proofreader’s craft ensures the faithfulness of the printed text to the author’s handwritten original. 
 Yet even the text that has passed through the castle gates of print is inconstant. Each edition of a book represents one fossil record of a text, a record that changes every time the work is translated, quoted, revised, interpreted, or taught. Since the rise of digital tools for writing and publishing, manuscript originals have all but vanished. Electronic redlining is replacing the hieroglyphics of the editor. Online texts can be downloaded by users and reformatted, repurposed, and recombined. 
 Print helped establish the figure of the author as the owner of a text, and copyright laws were written in the early eighteenth century to protect the author’s rights to this property. The digital age is riven by battles between On the future of 
 those who argue, on the one hand, for the fundamental liberty of data and intellectual property, see 
 ideas, and those who hope to protect—sometimes indefinitely—the Lawrence Lessig, Free 
 investment made in publishing and authoring content. 
 Culture: How Big Media 
 Uses Technology and the Law 
 A classic typographic page emphasizes the completeness and closure of a to Lock Down Culture and 
 work, its authority as a finished product. Alternative design strategies in the Control Creativity (New 
 twentieth and twenty-first centuries reflect the contested nature of York: Penguin, 2004). 
 authorship by revealing the openness of texts to the flow of information and the corrosiveness of history. 
 4YPOGRAPHY 
 TO 
 text | 89 
 
 flaws, faults, rivers 
 the telephone book: 
 technology, schizo- 
 phrenia, electric speech 
 Book, 1989. Designer: 
 Richard Eckersley. Author: 
 Avital Ronell. Compositor: 
 Michael Jensen. Publisher: 
 University of Nebraska Press. 
 Photograph: Dan Meyers. 
 This book, a philosophical study 
 of writing as a material 
 technology, uses typography 
 to emphasize the rhetorical 
 argument of the text. This 
 spread, for example, is fractured 
 by typographic “rivers,” spaces 
 that connect vertically through 
 the page. Rivers violate the 
 even, unified texture that is a 
 sacred goal within traditional 
 typographic design. 
 90 | thinking with type 
 SPACING 
 Design is as much an act of spacing as an act of marking. The typographer’s art concerns not only the positive grain of letterforms, but the negative gaps between and around them. In letterpress printing, every space is constructed by a physical object, a blank piece of metal or wood with no raised image. 
 The faceless slugs of lead and slivers of copper inserted as spaces between words or letters are as physical as the relief characters around them. Thin strips of lead (called “leading”) divide the horizontal lines of type; wider blocks of “furniture” hold the margins of the page. 
 Although we take the breaks between words for granted, spoken language is perceived as a continuous flow, with no audible gaps. Spacing has become crucial, however, to alphabetic writing, which translates the sounds of speech into multiple characters. Spaces were introduced after the invention of the Greek alphabet to make words intelligible as distinct units. 
 Tryreadingalineoftextwithoutspacingtoseehowimportantithasbecome. 
 With the invention of typography, spacing and punctuation ossified from gap and gesture to physical artifact. Punctuation marks, which were used differently from one scribe to another in the manuscript era, became part of the standardized, rule-bound apparatus of the printed page. The communications scholar Walter Ong has shown how printing converted the word into a visual object precisely located in space: “Alphabet letterpress printing, in which each letter was cast on a separate piece of metal, or type, marked a psychological breakthrough of the first order....Print situates words in space more relentlessly than writing ever did. Writing moves words from the sound world to the world of visual Walter Ong, Orality and 
 space, but print locks words into position in this space.” Typography made Literacy: The Technologizing 
 text into a thing, a material object with known dimensions and fixed of the Word (London 
 locations. 
 and New York: Methuen, 
 1981). See also Jacques 
 The French philosopher Jacques Derrida, who devised the theory of Derrida, Of Grammatology, 
 deconstruction in the 1960s, wrote that although the alphabet represents trans. Gayatri Chakravorty 
 sound, it cannot function without silent marks and spaces. Typography Spivak (Baltimore: Johns 
 manipulates the silent dimensions of the alphabet, employing habits and Hopkins University Press, 
 1976). 
 techniques—such as spacing and punctuation—that are seen but not heard. 
 The Latin alphabet, rather than evolve into a transparent code for recording speech, developed its own visual resources, becoming a more powerful technology as it left behind its connections to the spoken word. 
 4HAT 
 OWN 
 text | 91 
 LINEARITY 
 In his essay “From Work to Text,” the French critic Roland Barthes presented two opposing models of writing: the closed, fixed “work” versus the open, unstable “text.” In Barthes’s view, the work is a tidy, neatly packaged object, proofread and copyrighted, made perfect and complete by the art of printing. 
 The text, in contrast, is impossible to contain, operating across a dispersed web of standard plots and received ideas. Barthes pictured the text as “woven entirely with citations, references, echoes, cultural languages (what language is not?), antecedent and contemporary, which cut across and through in a vast stereophony....The metaphor of the Text is that of the network .” Writing in the 1960s and 1970s, Barthes anticipated the Roland Barthes, “From 
 Internet as a decentralized web of connections. 
 Work to Text,” in Image/ 
 Barthes was describing literature, yet his ideas resonate for typography, the Music/Text, trans. Stephen Heath (New York: Hill 
 visual manifestation of language. The singular body of the traditional text and Wang, 1977), 155–64. 
 page has long been supported by the navigational features of the book, from page numbers and headings that mark a reader’s location to such tools as the index, appendix, abstract, footnote, and table of contents. These devices were able to emerge because the typographic book is a fixed sequence of pages, a body lodged in a grid of known coordinates. 
 All such devices are attacks on linearity, providing means of entrance and escape from the one-way stream of discourse. Whereas talking flows in a single direction, writing occupies space as well as time. Tapping that spatial dimension—and thus liberating readers from the bonds of linearity—is among typography’s most urgent tasks. 
 Although digital media are commonly celebrated for their potential as nonlinear potential communication, linearity nonetheless thrives in the electronic realm, from the “CNN crawl” that marches along the bottom of the television screen to the ticker-style LED signs that loop through the urban environment. Film titles—the celebrated convergence of typography and cinema—serve to distract the audience from the inescapable tedium of a contractually decreed, top-down disclosure of ownership and authorship. 
 Basic electronic book readers, such as Amazon’s Kindle (2007), provide a highly sequential, predominantly linear experience; flipping back or skipping ahead is more cumbersome in some electronic books than in paper ones. 
 Linearity dominates many commercial software applications. Word processing programs, for example, treat documents as a linear stream. 
 ! 
 NONE 
 92 | thinking with type 
 On the linearity of word 
 (In contrast, page layout programs such as Quark XPress and Adobe processing, see Nancy Kaplan, InDesign allow users to work spatially, breaking up text into columns and 
 “Blake’s Problem and Ours: 
 pages that can be anchored and landmarked.) PowerPoint and other Some Reflections on the 
 Image and the Word,” 
 presentation software programs are supposed to illuminate the spoken word Readerly/Writerly Texts, 3.2 
 by guiding the audience through the linear unfolding of an oral address. 
 (Spring/Summer 1996), 125. 
 Typically, however, PowerPoint enforces the one-way flow of speech rather On PowerPoint, see Edward 
 R. Tufte, “The Cognitive Style 
 than alleviating it. While a single sheet of paper could provide a map or of PowerPoint,” (Cheshire, 
 summary of an oral presentation, a PowerPoint show drags out in time Conn.: Graphics Press, 2003). 
 across numerous screens. 
 Not all digital media favor linear flow over spatial arrangement, however. 
 The database, one of the defining information structures of our time, is a nonlinear form. Providing readers and writers with a simultaneous menu of options, a database is a system of elements that can be arranged in countless sequences. Page layouts are built on the fly from chunks of information, assembled in response to user feedback. The web is pushing authors, editors, and designers to work inventively with new modes of microcontent (page titles, key words, alt tags) that allow data to be searched, indexed, tagged, or otherwise marked for recall. 
 On the aesthetics of the 
 Databases are the structure behind electronic games, magazines, and database, see Lev Manovich, 
 catalogues, genres that create an information space rather than a linear The Language of New Media 
 sequence . Physical stores and libraries are databases of tangible objects found (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
 2002). 
 in the built environment. Media critic Lev Manovich has described language itself as a kind of database, an archive of elements from which people assemble the linear utterances of speech. Many design projects call for the emphasis of space over sequence, system over utterance, simultaneous structure over linear narrative. Contemporary design often combines aspects of architecture, typography, film, wayfinding, branding, and other modes of address. By dramatizing the spatial quality of a project, designers can foster understanding of complex documents or environments. 
 The history of typography is marked by the increasingly sophisti cated use of space. In the digital age, where characters are accessed by keystroke and mouse, not gathered from heavy drawers of manufactured units, space has become more liquid than concrete, and typography has evolved from a stable body of objects to a flexible system of attributes. 
 $ATABASE 
 EACH 
 text | 93 
 
 
 immense dictionary of ideas 
 visual thesaurus 2.0. Interactive 
 media, 2003. Designers: Plumb 
 Design Inc. This digital thesaurus 
 presents words within a dynamic web 
 of relationships. The central term is 
 linked to nodes representing that word’s 
 different senses. The more connections 
 each of these satellite nodes contain, 
 the bigger and closer it appears on the 
 screen. Clicking on a satellite word 
 brings it to the center. 
 94 | thinking with type 
 
 image/music/text 
 Concordance and text stats 
 for Roland Barthes’s book 
 Image/Music/Text . Publisher: 
 Amazon.com, 2010. Amazon 
 presents automated analyses 
 of a book’s text in order to 
 give readers an idea of what is 
 inside. The concordance feature 
 lists the book’s one hundred 
 most commonly used words 
 in alphabetical order and 
 sizes them according to their 
 frequency. 
 3UCCEEDING 
 PASSIONS 
 DICTIONARY 
 °ROLAND 
 text | 95 
 
 undermining the wholeness of the text 
 96 | thinking with type 
 BIRTH 
 Barthes’s model of the text as an open web of references, rather than a closed and perfect work, asserts the importance of the reader over the writer in creating meaning. The reader “plays” the text as a musician plays an instrument. The author does not control its significance: “The text itself plays (like a door, like a machine with ‘play’) and the reader plays twice over, playing the Text as one plays a game, looking for a practice which reproduces it.” Like an interpretation of a musical score, reading is a performance of the written word. 
 Graphic designers embraced the idea of the readerly text in the 1980s and early 1990s, using layers of text and interlocking grids to explore Barthes’s theory of the “death of the author.” In place of the classical model of typography as a crystal goblet for content, this alternative view assumes that content itself changes with each act of representation. Typography becomes a mode of interpretation. 
 Redefining typography as “discourse,” designer Katherine McCoy cranbrook design: 
 imploded the traditional dichotomy between seeing and reading. Pictures the new discourse 
 can be read (analyzed, decoded, taken apart), and words can be seen Book, 1990. Designers: 
 (perceived as icons, forms, patterns). Valuing ambiguity and complexity, her Katherine McCoy, P. Scott 
 Makela, and Mary Lou 
 approach challenged readers to produce their own meanings while also Kroh. Publisher: Rizzoli. 
 trying to elevate the status of designers within the process of authorship. 
 Photograph: Dan Meyers. 
 Another model, which undermined the designer’s new claim to power, Under the direction of 
 Katherine and Michael 
 surfaced at the end of the 1990s, borrowed not from literary criticism but McCoy, the graduate program 
 from human-computer interaction (HCI) studies and the fields of interface in graphic and industrial 
 and usability design. The dominant subject of our age has become neither design at Cranbrook Academy 
 reader nor writer but user , a figure conceived as a bundle of needs and of Art was a leading center 
 for experimental design from 
 impairments—cognitive, physical, emotional. Like a patient or child, the the 1970s through the early 
 user is a figure to be protected and cared for but also scrutinized and 1990s. Katherine McCoy 
 controlled, submitted to research and testing. 
 developed a model of 
 “typography as discourse,” in 
 How texts are used becomes more important than what they mean. 
 which the designer and reader 
 Someone clicked here to get over there. Someone who bought this also actively interpret a text. 
 bought that. The interactive environment not only provides users with a degree of control and self-direction but also, more quietly and insidiously, it gathers data about its audiences. Barthes’s image of the text as a game to be played still holds, as the user responds to signals from the system. We may play the text, but it is also playing us. 
 $ESIGN 
 FOIBLES 
 BUT 
 text | 97 
 Graphic designers can use theories of user interaction to revisit some of On screen readability, 
 our basic assumptions about visual communication. Why, for example, are see John D. Gould et al., 
 readers on the web less patient than readers of print? It is commonly 
 “Reading from CRT Displays 
 Can Be as Fast as Reading 
 believed that digital displays are inherently more difficult to read than ink on from Paper,” Human Factors , paper. Yet HCI studies conducted in the late 1980s proved that crisp black 29, 5 (1987): 497–517. 
 text on a white background can be read just as efficiently from a screen as from a printed page. 
 The impatience of the digital reader arises from culture, not from the On the restless user, see 
 essential character of display technologies. Users of websites have different Jakob Nielsen, Designing 
 expectations than users of print. They expect to feel “productive,” not Web Usability (Indianapolis: 
 New Riders, 2000). 
 contemplative. They expect to be in search mode, not processing mode. 
 Users also expect to be disappointed, distracted, and delayed by false leads. 
 The cultural habits of the screen are driving changes in design for print, while at the same time affirming print’s role as a place where extended reading can still occur. 
 Another common assumption is that icons are a more universal mode of On the failure of interface 
 communication than text. Icons are central to the GUIs (graphical user icons, see Jef Raskin, 
 interfaces) that routinely connect users with computers. Yet text can often The Humane Interface: New 
 Directions for Designing 
 provide a more specific and understandable cue than a picture. Icons don’t Interactive Systems (Reading, 
 actually simplify the trans lation of content into multiple languages, because Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 2000). 
 they require explanation in multiple languages. The endless icons of the digital desktop, often rendered with gratuitous detail and depth, function more to enforce brand identity than to support usability. In the twentieth century, modern designers hailed pictures as a “universal” 
 language, yet in the age of code, text has become a more common denom-inator than images—searchable, translatable, and capable of being reformatted and restyled for alternative or future media. 
 Perhaps the most persistent impulse of twentieth-century art and design was to physically integrate form and content. The Dada and Futurist poets, for example, used typography to create texts whose content was inextricable from the concrete layout of specific letterforms on a page. In the twenty-first century, form and content are being pulled back apart. Style sheets, for example, compel designers to think globally and systematically instead of focusing on the fixed construction of a particular surface. This way of 7EB 
 °JAKOB 
 98 | thinking with type 
 thinking allows content to be reformatted for different devices or users, and it also prepares for the afterlife of data as electronic storage media begin their own cycles of decay and obsolescence. 
 In the twentieth century, modern artists and critics asserted that each medium is specific. They defined film, for example, as a constructive language distinct from theater, and they described painting as a physical medium that refers to its own processes. Today, however, the medium is not On transmedia design 
 always the message. Design has become a “transmedia” enterprise, as thinking, see Brenda Laurel, 
 authors and producers create worlds of characters, places, situations, and Utopian Entrepreneur 
 interactions that can appear across a variety of products. A game might live (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
 2001). 
 in different versions on a video screen, a desktop computer, a game console, and a cell phone, as well as on t-shirts, lunch boxes, and plastic toys. 
 The beauty and wonder of “white space” is another modernist myth that is subject to revision in the age of the user. Modern designers discovered that open space on a page can have as much physical presence as printed areas. 
 White space is not always a mental kindness, however. Edward Tufte, a fierce advocate of visual density, argues for maximizing the amount of data conveyed on a single page or screen. In order to help readers make connections and comparisons, as well as to find information quickly, a single surface packed with well-organized information is sometimes better than multiple pages with a lot of blank space. In typography as in urban life, density invites intimate exchange among people and ideas. 
 Jef Raskin talks about the 
 In our much-fabled era of information overload, a person can still process scarcity of human attention 
 only one message at a time. This brute fact of cognition is the secret behind as well as the myth of white 
 magic tricks: sleights of hand occur while the attention of the audience is space in The Humane 
 Interface: New Directions for 
 drawn elsewhere. Given the fierce competition for their attention, users have Designing Interactive Systems , 
 a chance to shape the information economy by choosing what to look at. 
 cited on p. 74. 
 Designers can help them make satisfying choices. 
 Typography is an interface to the alphabet. User theory tends to favor normative solutions over innovative ones, pushing design into the background. Readers usually ignore the typographic interface, gliding comfortably along literacy’s habitual groove. Sometimes, however, the interface should be allowed to fail. By making itself evident, typography can illuminate the construction and identity of a page, screen, place, or product. 
 )F 
 *OURNAL 
 text | 99 
 Typography, invented in the Renaissance, allowed text to become a fixed and stable form. Like the body of the letter, the body of text was transformed into an industrial commodity that gradually became more open and flexible. 
 Critics of electronic media have noted that the rise of networked communication did not lead to the much feared destruction of typography (or even to the death of print), but rather to the burgeoning of the alphabetic empire. As Peter Lunenfeld points out, the computer has revived the power and prevalence of writing: “Alphanumeric text has risen from its own ashes, On electronic writing, see a digital phoenix taking flight on monitors, across networks, and in the Peter Lunenfeld, Snap to 
 realms of virtual space.” The computer display is more hospitable to text Grid: A User’s Guide to 
 Digital Arts, Media, and 
 than the screens of film or television because it offers physical proximity, Cultures (Cambridge: MIT 
 user control, and a scale appropriate to the body. 
 Press, 2001); Jay David 
 The printed book is no longer the chief custodian of the written word. 
 Bolter, Writing Space: 
 Computers, Hypertext, and 
 Branding is a powerful variant of literacy that revolves around symbols, the Remediation of Print 
 icons, and typographic standards, leaving its marks on buildings, packages, (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
 album covers, websites, store displays, and countless other surfaces and Erlbaum Associates, 2001), 
 and Stuart Moulthrop, “You 
 spaces. With the expansion of the Internet, new (and old) conventions for Say You Want a Revolution? 
 displaying text quickly congealed, adapting metaphors from print and Hypertext and the Laws 
 architecture: window, frame, page, banner, menu. Designers working within of Media,” in The New Media this stream of multiple media confront text in myriad forms, giving shape to Reader , ed. Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Nick Monfort 
 extended bodies but also to headlines, decks, captions, notes, pull quotes, (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
 logotypes, navigation bars, alt tags, and other prosthetic clumps of language 2003), 691–703. 
 that announce, support, and even eclipse the main body of text. 
 The dissolution of writing is most extreme in the realm of the web, where distracted readers safeguard their time and prize function over form. This debt of restlessness is owed not to the essential nature of computer monitors, but to the new behaviors engendered by the Internet, a place of searching and finding, scanning and mining. The reader, having toppled the author’s seat of power during the twentieth century, now ails and lags, replaced by the dominant subject of our own era: the user , a figure whose scant attention is our most coveted commodity. Do not squander it. 
 (YPERTEXT 
 100 | thinking with type 
 
 howling at the moon 
 designobserver.com Website, 2010. 
 Design: Jessica Helfand, William Drenttel, 
 Michael Bierut, and Betsy Vardell. Packing 
 an enormous volume of content onto its home 
 page, this design discourse supersite brings 
 print-quality typography to the screen. 
 text | 101 
 KERNING 
 Kerning is an adjustment of the space between two letters. The characters of the Latin alphabet 
 Takes Two 
 emerged over time; they were never designed 
 scala pro, with kerning suppressed 
 with mechanical or automated spacing in mind. 
 Spacing appears uneven, with gaps around T/a, T/w, and w/o. 
 Thus some letter combinations look awkward 
 without special spacing considerations. Gaps 
 Takes Two 
 occur, for example, around letters whose forms 
 angle outward or frame an open space ( W , Y , V , 
 scala pro, with metric kerning 
 Spacing appears more even between T/a and T/w . 
 T ). In metal type, a kerned letter extends past the lead slug that supports it, allowing two letters to 
 Takes Two 
 fit more closely together. In digital fonts, the 
 space between letter pairs is controlled by a 
 scala pro, with optical kerning 
 kerning table created by the type designer, which Spacing seems more even between T/a, T/w, and w/o . 
 specifies spaces between problematic letter 
 combinations. 
 Warm Type 
 Working in a page layout program, a designer 
 can choose to use metric kerning or optical kerning scala pro italic, with kerning suppressed 
 Spacing appears uneven between W/a and T/y . 
 as well as adjusting the space between letters 
 manually where desired. A well-designed typeface 
 requires little or no additional kerning, especially Warm Type at text sizes. 
 scala pro italic, with metric kerning 
 Spacing appears more even between W/a and T/y . 
 metric kerning uses the kerning tables that are built into the typeface. When you select metric kerning in your page layout program, you are using the spacing that was intended by Warm Type the type designer. Metric kerning usually looks good, especially at small sizes. Cheap novelty fonts often have little or no built-scala pro italic, with optical kerning 
 in kerning and will need to be optically kerned. 
 Spacing is comparable to metric kerning. 
 optical kerning is executed automatically by the page layout LOVE LETTERS 
 program. Rather than using the pairs addressed in the font’s kerning table, optical kerning assesses the shapes of all scala pro all capitals, with kerning suppressed characters and adjusts the spacing wherever needed. Some Spacing is tight between T/T . 
 graphic designers apply optical kerning to headlines and metric kerning to text. You can make this process efficient and LOVE LETTERS 
 consistent by setting kerning as part of your character styles. 
 scala pro all capitals, with metric kerning 
 Improved spacing between T/T . 
 LOVE LETTERS 
 scala pro all capitals, with optical kerning 
 Improved spacing between T/ T and O/V. 
 102 | thinking with type 
 adjusting the space between two letters kerning headlines The subtle differences 
 between metric and optical kerning become more 
 )B 
 apparent at larger sizes. Most problems occur 
 metric kerning 
 between capital and lowercase letters. The spacing 
 between H/a , T/a , and T/o improves with optical kerning. The optical kerning applied here in 
 )B optical kerning 
 InDesign has created tighter spacing for large text 
 and looser spacing for small text. Look at both 
 effects before choosing a kerning method. 
 METRIC 
 #PPLT"OE)BSMPUT)BWF5IFJS2VBSSFMT*O1VCMJD 
 #PPLT"OE)BSMPUT #PPLTBOEIBSMPUT± 
 GPPUOPUFTJOPOFBSF 
 BTCBOLOPUFTJOUIF 
 TUPDLJOHTPGUIFPUIFS 
 $BO#F5BLFO5P#FE 
 ±XBMUFSCFOKBNJO
 
 quadraat sans, with metric kerning 
 #PPLT"OE)BSMPUT)BWF5IFJS2VBSSFMT*O1VCMJD 
 #PPLT"OE)BSMPUT #PPLTBOEIBSMPUT± 
 GPPUOPUFTJOPOFBSF 
 BTCBOLOPUFTJOUIF 
 TUPDLJOHTPGUIFPUIFS 
 $BO#F5BLFO5P#FE 
 ±XBMUFSCFOKBNJO
 
 quadraat sans, with optical kerning 
 NERD 
 above has word spacing reduced to 80 percent. With large type, normal word spacing often looks too wide. Adjust word spacing in the Paragraph&gt;Justification menu in InDesign. 
 text | 103 
 
 
 TRACKING 
 Adjusting the overall spacing of a group of letters 
 is called tracking or letterspacing . By expanding the tracking across a word, line, or entire block of 
 text, the designer can create a more airy, open 
 field. In blocks of text, tracking is usually applied in small increments, creating a subtle effect not 
 SCALY-BREASTED PARTRIDGE 
 CRIMSON-HEADED PARTRIDGE 
 Arborophila chloropus 
 Haematortyx sanguiniceps 
 noticeable to the casual reader. Occasionally, a 
 12 in (30 cm) 
 10 in (25 cm) 
 Southeast Asia 
 Borneo 
 single word or phrase is tracked for emphasis, 
 especially when CAPS or small caps are used 
 within a line. Negative tracking, rarely desirable in birds of the world Book, 2007. Author: Les Beletsky. 
 Publisher: The Johns Hopkins University. Art Director: text sizes, can be used sparingly to help bring up a 
 &lt; 
 Charles Nix. Designers: Charles Nix, Whitney Grant, and short line of text. White type on a black background 
 May Jampathom. This book, set in Adobe Caslon and Caslon is considered more legible when it is tracked. 
 = 
 540, uses tracked small capitals for caption headings. 
 TRACKING 
 = 
 normal tracking 
 positive tracking (+20) 
 negative tracking (-20) 
 &lt; 
 Letters do love one another. 
 Letters do love one another. SILVER P Let 
 HEA te 
 SA rs 
 NT do love one another. 
 RED JUNGLEFOWL 
 However, due to their 
 However, due to their 
 Lophura ny How 
 ctheme e ra ver, due to their anatomical Gallus gallus 
 24 – 47 in (61 – 120 cm) 
 16.5 – 29.5 in (42 – 75 cm) 
 anatomical differences, some 
 anatomical differences, some 
 Southeast d 
 As iifaferences, some letters have 
 Southern Asia 
 letters have a hard time 
 letters have a hard time 
 a hard time achieving intimacy. 
 achieving intimacy. Consider 
 achieving intimacy. Consider 
 Consider the letter L , for 
 the letter L , for example, whose 
 the letter L , for example, 
 example, whose seductive val ey 
 seductive valley makes her 
 whose seductive val ey makes 
 makes her limbs stretch out 
 limbs stretch out above her 
 her limbs stretch out above 
 above her base. In contrast, 
 base. In contrast, L solidly 
 her base. In contrast, B solidly 
 B solidly holds his ground yet 
 holds his ground yet harbors a 
 holds his ground yet harbors 
 harbors a certain emptiness 
 certain emptiness above the 
 a certain emptiness above the 
 above the waist. Capital letters, 
 waist. Capital letters, being 
 waist. Capital letters, being 
 being square and conservative, 
 square and conservative, prefer 
 square and conservative, 
 prefer to keep a little distance 
 to keep a little distance from 
 prefer to keep a little distance 
 from their neighbors. GREAT ARGUS 
 their neighbors. 
 from their neighbors. 
 Argusianus argus 
 28.5 – 78.5 in (72 – 200 cm) 
 TYPE 
 Southeast Asia 
 tightly tracked text 
 Letters are tracked too close 
 for comfort. 
 = 
 = 
 &lt; 
 &lt; 
 #PPLTBOEIBSMPUT±CPUIIBWFUIFJS 
 #PPLTBOEIBSMPUT±CPUIIBWFUIFJS 
 UZQFPGNBO
XIPCPUIMJWFTPGGBOE 
 UZQFPGNBO
XIPCPUIMJWFTPGGBOE 
 IBSBTTFTUIFN*OUIFDBTFPGCPPLT
 
 IBSBTTFTUIFN*OUIFDBTFPGCPPLT
 
 DSJUJDT XBMUFSCFOKBNJO 
 
 CRESTED DSJUJDT 
 WOOD-PART XB 
 RIDGE 
 CRESTED FIREBACK 
 Rollulus rouloul 
 MUFSCFOKBNJO 
 Lop 
 
 hura 
 ignita 
 10 in (26 cm) 
 22 – 27.5 in (56 – 70 cm) 
 reversed type, no tracking 
 Southeast Are 
 sia versed type, tracked +25 
 Southeast Asia 
 104 | thinking with type 
 
 
 
 adjusting space across a range of letters 
 Designers most commonly apply tracking to 
 TRACKING 
 headlines and logos (where kerning adjustments 
 are also frequently required). As text gets bigger, 
 LOVE LETTERS 
 the space between letters expands, and some 
 capitals: normal tracking 
 designers use tracking to diminish overall spacing 
 in large-scale text. Loose or open tracking is 
 LOVE LETTERS 
 commonly applied to capitals and small capitals, 
 capitals: loose tracking (+75) 
 which appear more regal standing slightly apart. 
 love letters, love letters 
 small caps: normal vs. loose tracking (+75) 
 love letters, love letters 
 lower case: normal tracking 
 love letters, love letters 
 lower case: loose tracking (+75) 
 TYPE 
 Loosely spaced lowercase letters—especially italics—look awkward because these characters are designed to sit closely together on a line. 
 eros Logotype, 1962. Design: 
 Herb Lubalin. Ultra-tight 
 letterspacing was a hallmark of 
 progressive commercial graphics 
 in the 1960s and 1970s. Here, 
 the letters cradle each other with 
 an intimacy appropriate to the 
 subject matter. 
 cruet &amp; whisk and thymes Logotypes, 2006. Design: Duffy 
 &amp; Partners. The generously tracked capitals in these logotypes give them an affable, antiquarian flavor while imparting an overall lightness to the designs. 
 text | 105 
 EXERCISE 
 You can express the meaning of a word 
 or an idea through the spacing, sizing, 
 and placement of letters on the page. 
 Designers often think this way when 
 creating logotypes, posters, or editorial 
 headlines. The compositions shown here 
 express physical processes such as 
 disruption, expansion, and migration 
 sition 
 transition 
 through the spacing and arrangement of 
 letters. The round O s in Futura make it 
 a fun typeface to use for this project. 
 Examples of student work from 
 Maryland Institute College of Art 
 Johnschen Kudos 
 dis uption 
 r 
 c o mpression 
 Johnschen Kudos 
 Johnschen Kudos 
 106 | thinking with type 
 use space to express movement and change ion 
 t 
 a 
 e 
 x 
 e xp p aa n 
 s 
 s 
 expansion i i o on n 
 transition 
 
 igr 
 m 
 migration 
 Marcos Kolthar 
 Jason Hogg 
 o 
 o 
 elimina ion 
 t 
 o 
 t 
 o 
 t 
 t 
 t 
 t 
 o 
 t 
 t 
 o o 
 t 
 t 
 o 
 t 
 o 
 t 
 repetition 
 Heather Williams 
 Heather Williams 
 text | 107 
 LINE 
 The distance from the baseline of one line of type 
 different 
 to another is called line spacing . It is also called different 
 leading, in reference to the strips of lead used to folks 
 folks 
 separate lines of metal type. The default setting in 
 most layout and imaging software is 120 percent 
 different 
 different 
 of the type size. Thus 10-pt type is set with 12 pts 
 strokes 
 strokes 
 of line spacing. Designers play with line spacing 
 in order to create distinctive typographic 
 TYPE 
 Adjusting line spacing with 
 Here, auto spacing yields 
 the baseline shift tool helps create 
 arrangements. Reducing the standard distance 
 an uneven effect. 
 an even appearance. 
 creates a denser typographic color, while risking 
 collisions between ascenders and descenders. 
 Expanding the line spacing creates a lighter, more 
 NERD 
 Aa 
 open text block. As leading increases, lines of type 
 adjustment of the horizontal position of one 
 or more characters. Baseline shifts are often 
 become independent graphic elements rather 
 used when mixing different sizes or styles of type. The than parts of an overall visual shape and texture. 
 baseline shift tool can be found in the Type tool bar of standard software applications. 
 VARIATIONS 
 The distance from the baseline of one 
 The distance from the baseline of one 
 The distance from the baseline of one 
 The distance from the baseline of one 
 line of type to another is called line 
 line of type to another is called line 
 line of type to another is called line 
 spacing . It is also called leading, in ref-spacing. It is also called leading, in ref-line of type to another is called line 
 erence to the strips of lead used to 
 spacing . It is also called leading, in ref-separate lines of metal type. The 
 erence to the strips of lead used to 
 erence to the strips of lead used to 
 spacing . It is also called leading, in ref-default setting in most layout and 
 separate lines of metal type. The 
 separate lines of metal type. The 
 imaging software is 120 percent of the 
 default setting in most layout and 
 erence to the strips of lead used to 
 type size. Thus 10-pt type is set with 12 
 imaging software is 120 percent of the 
 default setting in most layout and 
 pts of line spacing. Designers play 
 type size. Thus 10-pt type is set with 12 
 imaging software is 120 percent of the 
 separate lines of metal type. The 
 with line spacing in order to create 
 type size. Thus 10-pt type is set with 12 
 distinctive layouts. Reducing the stan- 
 pts of line spacing. Designers play 
 default setting in most layout and 
 dard distance creates a denser typo- 
 with line spacing in order to create 
 pts of line spacing. Designers play 
 graphic color—while risking collisions 
 distinctive layouts. Reducing the stan- 
 with line spacing in order to create 
 imaging software is 120 percent of the 
 between ascenders and descenders. 
 dard distance creates a denser typo- 
 distinctive layouts. Reducing the stan- 
 graphic color—while risking collisions 
 type size. Thus 10-pt type is set with 12 
 dard distance creates a denser typo- 
 between ascenders and descenders. 
 graphic color—while risking collisions 
 pts of line spacing. Designers play with 
 
 between ascenders and descenders. 
 
 line spacing in order to create distinc- 
 
 tive layouts. Reducing the standard 
 distance creates a denser typographic 
 color—while risking collisions between 
 ascenders and descenders. 
 
 
 6/6 scala pro 
 6/7.2 scala pro 
 6/8 scala pro 
 6/12 scala pro 
 (6 pt type with 6 pts line 
 (Auto spacing; 6 pt type 
 (6 pt type with 
 (6 pt type with 
 spacing, or “set solid”) 
 with 7.2 pts line spacing) 
 8 pts line spacing) 
 12 pts line spacing) 
 108 | thinking with type 
 
 open lines of text interlock 
 dance ink: an avid dream 
 of transformation 
 Magazine page, 1992. 
 Designer: Abbott Miller. 
 Publisher: Patsy Tarr. The 
 extreme line spacing allows two 
 strands of text to interweave. 
 text | 109 
 
 LINE 
 Designers experiment with extreme line spacing 
 to create distinctive typographic textures. Open 
 spacing allows designers to play with the space 
 between the lines, while tight spacing creates 
 intriguing, sometimes uncomfortable, collisions. 
 o livro amerelo do terminal Book spread, 2008. 
 Designer: Vanessa Barbara with Elaine Ramos and Maria Carolina Sampaio. Publisher: Cosac Naify. Here, pages of text are set with loose line spacing and printed on thin paper. The vertical placement of the text block varies from spread to spread, allowing text to show through between the lines. 
 110 | thinking with type 
 
 
 experimenting with extreme line spacing 
 visionary cities: the 
 arcology of paolo soleri 
 Book, 1970. Design: Paolo 
 Soleri. This classic work of 
 postmodern design uses ultra- 
 tight line spacing to create 
 dramatic density on the page. 
 Produced long before the era of 
 digital page layout, this book 
 exploited the possibilities of 
 phototypesetting and dry 
 transfer lettering. 
 text | 111 
 ALIGNMENT 
 Choosing to align text in justified, centered, or 
 ragged columns is a fundamental typographic act. 
 Each mode of alignment carries unique formal 
 qualities, cultural associations, and aesthetic risks. 
 Justified text, which has even edges on both the left and right sides of the column, has been the norm 
 Centered text is symmetrical, 
 since the invention of printing with movable type, 
 like the facade of a classical building. 
 which enabled the creation of page after page of 
 straight-edged columns. In metal type setting, the 
 Centered type often appears on 
 printer justifies each line by hand, using small invitations, title pages, certificates, and tomb stones. 
 metal spacers to alter the spaces between words and letters and thus make all the lines the same 
 The edges of a centered column 
 length. Digital typesetting performs the same 
 are often dramatically uneven. 
 labor automatically. Justified type makes efficient 
 use of space. It also creates a clean, compact Centered lines should be broken to emphasize a key phrase shape on the page. Ugly gaps can occur, however, 
 (such as the name of the bride 
 when the line length is too short in relation to the 
 size of type used. Hyphenation breaks up long 
 or the date of her wedding) 
 words and helps keep the lines of text tightly or to allow a new thought to begin on its own line. 
 packed. Designers often use negative tracking to fit 
 additional characters on a line, or positive tracking Breaking lines in this manner is called 
 to even out a line of type that looks too loose. 
 breaking for sense . 
 CENTERED 
 JUSTIFIED 
 Lines of ueven length on a central axis 
 Left and right edges are both even 
 Centered text is formal and classical. It invites 
 Justified text makes a clean shape on the page. 
 the designer to break a text for sense and 
 Its efficient use of space makes it the norm for 
 create elegant, organic shapes. Centering is 
 newspapers and books. Ugly gaps can occur, 
 often the simplest and most intuitive way to 
 however, as text is forced into lines of even 
 place a typographic element. Used without 
 measure. Avoid this by using a line length that 
 care, centered text can look staid and 
 is long enough in relation to the size of type. 
 mournful, like a tombstone. 
 As type gets smaller, more words will fit on 
 each line. 
 TYPE 
 TYPE 
 this dreary shape 
 Ugly gaps appear when 
 poorly shaped 
 full of holes 
 the designer has made 
 has random line 
 text block In most 
 the line length too A column that is too 
 breaks that don’t 
 uses, centered text 
 short, or the author narrow is full of gaps. 
 respond to the 
 should be broken into 
 has selected words that 
 rhythm of the 
 phrases with a variety 
 are 
 too 
 long. 
 written text. 
 of long and short lines. 
 112 | thinking with type 
 standard modes of alignment 
 In flush left/ragged right text, the left edge is Flush right/ragged left is a variant of the more hard and the right edge soft. Word spaces do not 
 familiar flush left setting. It is common wisdom 
 fluctuate, so there are never big holes 
 among typographers that flush right text is hard to 
 inside the lines of text. This format, which was 
 read, because it forces the reader’s eye to find a 
 used primarily for setting poetry before 
 new position at the start of each line. 
 the twentieth century, respects the flow of 
 This could be true, or it could be an urban legend. 
 language rather than submitting to the law of the 
 That being said, the flush right setting is rarely 
 box. Despite its advantages, however, the flush 
 employed for long bodies of text. Used in smaller 
 left format is fraught with danger. Above all, the 
 blocks, however, flush right text forms effective 
 designer must work hard to control the 
 marginal notes, sidebars, pull quotes, or other 
 appearance of the rag that forms along the right passages that comment on a main body or image. 
 edge. A good rag looks pleasantly uneven, with 
 A flush or ragged edge can suggest attraction 
 no lines that are excessively long or short, and 
 (or repulsion) between chunks of information. 
 with hyphenation kept to a minimum. A rag is 
 considered “bad” when it looks too even (or too 
 uneven), or when it begins to form regular 
 shapes, like wedges, moons, or diving boards. 
 FLUSH 
 FLUSH 
 Left edge is hard; right edge is soft 
 Right edge is hard; left edge is soft 
 Flush left text respects the organic flow of 
 Flush right text can be a welcome departure from 
 language and avoids the uneven spacing that 
 the familiar. Used for captions, side bars, and 
 plagues justified type. A bad rag can ruin the 
 other marginalia, it can suggest affinities among 
 relaxed, organic appearance of a flush left 
 elements. Because flush right text is unusual, it 
 column. Designers must strive vigilantly to 
 can annoy cautious readers. Bad rags threaten 
 create the illusion of a random, natural edge 
 flush right text just as they afflict flush left, and without resorting to excessive hyphenation. 
 punctuation can weaken the hard right edge. 
 TYPE 
 TYPE 
 A bad rag will fall 
 bad rag 
 Lots of punctuation punctuation eats 
 into weird shapes 
 An ugly wedge shape spoils 
 (at the ends of lines) the edge Excessive 
 along the right 
 will attack, threaten, 
 the ragged edge. 
 edge, instead 
 and generally punctuation weakens the 
 of looking 
 weaken the flush right edge. 
 random. 
 right edge. 
 text | 113 
 
 
 
 
 ALIGNMENT 
 The four modes of alignment (centered, justified, 
 flush left, and flush right) form the basic grammar 
 of typographic composition. Each one has traditional 
 uses that make intuitive sense to readers. 
 CENTERED 
 JUSTIFIED 
 the works of virgil Printed for Jacob Tonson, 1698. Title the complete writings of elbert hubbard, volume two 
 pages are traditionally set centered. This two-color title page was Printed by the Roycroft Shop, 1908. This neo-Renaissance book printed in two passes of the press (note the off-kilter registration of the page harkens back to the first century of printing. Not only is the two colors of ink). Large typefaces were created primarily for use on block of text perfectly justified, but paragraph symbols are used in title pages or in hymn books. 
 place of indents and line breaks to preserve the solidity of the page. 
 114 | thinking with type 
 
 
 standard modes of alignment in use 
 FLUSH 
 FLUSH 
 charles baudelaire/les fleurs du mal Printed by Bill 
 layout in advertising Designed and written by W. A. 
 Lansing, 1945. Traditionally, poetry is set flush left, because the line Dwiggins, 1928. In this classic guide to commercial art practices, breaks are an essential element of the literary form. Poetry is not Dwiggins has placed callouts or subject cues in the margins. On ususally set centered, except in greeting cards. 
 the left-hand (verso) page shown here, the cues are set flush right, drawing them closer to the content they identify. 
 text | 115 
 
 ALIGNMENT 
 Designers sometimes use the archetypal modes 
 of alignment in ways that emphasize their visual 
 qualities. Combining different types of alignment 
 can yield dynamic and surprising layouts. 
 flush left and flush right: vas: an opera in 
 flatland Book spread, 2002. Designer: Stephen Farrell. 
 Author: Steve Tomasula. In this typographic novel, texts and images align left and right against a series of thin rules. Hanging punctuation and boldface letters emphasize the flush edges. 
 116 | thinking with type 
 
 
 experimenting with alignment 
 flush left and flush 
 right: informal Book, 
 2002. Designer: Januzzi 
 Smith. Author: Cecil 
 Balmond. Photograph: Dan 
 Meyers. This book is a 
 manifesto for an informal 
 approach to structural 
 engineering and architecture. 
 The text columns juxtapose 
 flush right against flush left 
 alignments, creating a tiny but 
 insistent seam or fissure inside 
 the text and irregular rags 
 along the outer edges. 
 justified: hella jongerius Book, 2003. Designers: COMA. 
 Photograph: Dan Meyers. Transparent paper emphasizes the justified text block. Images hang from a consistent horizontal point, creating a throughline that is visible along the edge of the book. 
 text | 117 
 EXERCISE 
 Use modes of alignment (flush left, flush 
 right, justified, and centered) to actively 
 PRINT SITUATES WORDS IN SPACE 
 interpret a passage of text. The passage 
 MORE RELENTLESSLY THAN WRITING 
 here, from Walter Ong’s book Orality and 
 EVER DID. writing moves words from the sound world BUT PRINT LOCKS WORDS INTO to a world of visual space, Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word , 
 POSITION IN THIS SPACE. CONTROL 
 explains how the invention of printing 
 OF POSITION IS EVERYTHING IN 
 PRINT. PRINTED TEXTS LOOK 
 with movable type imposed a new spatial 
 MACHINE-MADE, AS THEY ARE. 
 in handwriting, control of space 
 order on the written word, in contrast 
 tends to be ornamental, 
 TYPOGRAPHIC CONTROL TYPICALLY 
 with the more organic pages of the 
 IMPRESSES MOST BY ITS TIDINESS ornate, as in calligraphy. 
 AND INVISIBILITY: THE LINES 
 manu script era. The solutions shown 
 PERFECTLY REGULAR, ALL JUSTIFIED 
 ON THE RIGHT SIDE, EVERYTHING 
 here comment on the conflicts between 
 COMING OUT EVEN VISUALLY, AND 
 hard and soft, industrial and natural, 
 WITHOUT THE AID OF GUIDELINES OR 
 RULED BORDERS THAT OFTEN 
 planning and chance, that underlie all 
 OCCUR IN MANUSCRIPTS. THIS IS AN 
 typographic composition. 
 INSISTENT WORLD OF COLD, NON- 
 HUMAN, FACTS. 
 Examples of student work from 
 Randomly spaced words break free from a rigidly justified column. 
 Maryland Institute College of Art 
 Lu Zhang 
 
 PRINT 
 Print situates words 
 in space more 
 situates words in space more relentlessly 
 relentlessly than 
 writing ever did. 
 than writing ever did. Control of position 
 Writing moves words from the sound world to a world of visual space, but print locks 
 is everything in print. Printed texts look 
 words into position 
 in this space. 
 machine-made, as they are. Typographic 
 Control of position 
 is everything in 
 control typically impresses most by its 
 print. Printed texts 
 WRITING 
 look machine-made, 
 tidiness and invisibility: the lines perfectly 
 as they are. 
 moves words from the sound world 
 In handwriting, control of space tends to be ornamental, ornate. 
 regular, all justified on the right side, 
 Typographic control 
 to a world of visual space, 
 typically impresses 
 everything coming out even visually, and 
 most by its tidiness 
 but print locks words 
 and invisibility: the 
 without the aid of guidelines or ruled 
 lines perfectly regular, 
 into position in this space. 
 all justified on the 
 This is an insistent 
 borders that often occur in manuscripts. 
 right side, everything 
 world of cold, 
 In handwriting, control of space 
 coming out even 
 non-human, facts. 
 This is an insistent world of cold, 
 visually, and without 
 tends to be ornamental, ornate, 
 the aid of guidelines 
 non-human, facts. 
 or ruled borders that 
 as in calligraphy. 
 often occur in 
 manuscripts. 
 Passages of flush left and flush right text hinge from a central axis. 
 Long, centered lines are bridges between narrow, ragged columns. 
 Johnschen Kudos 
 Benjamin Lutz 
 118 | thinking with type 
 using alignment to interpret text 
 relentlessly than writing ever did. Writing 
 Print situates words in space more relentlessly than writing ever moves words from the sound world to a 
 world of visual space, but print locks words 
 did. Writing moves words from the sound world to a world of into position in this space. Control of posi-visual space, but print locks words into position in this space. 
 tion is everything in print. Printed texts 
 look machine-made, as they are. In hand- 
 Control of position is everything in print. 
 writing, control of space tends to be orna- 
 Printed texts look machine-made, as they are. In handwriting, mental, ornate, as in calligraphy. Typographic control typically impresses most by 
 control of space tends to be ornamental, ornate, as in cal igraphy. 
 its tidiness and invisibility: the lines per- 
 Typographic control typical y impresses most by its tidiness and fectly regular, all justified on the right side, 
 everything coming out even visually, and 
 invisibility: the lines perfectly regular, al justified on the right without the aid of guidelines or ruled bor-side, everything coming out even visual y, and without the aid of ders that often occur in manuscripts. This 
 is an insistent world of cold, non-human, 
 guidelines or ruled borders that often occur in manuscripts. THIS 
 facts. 
 IS AN INSISTENT WORLD OF COLD, NON-HUMAN, FACTS. 
 
 Print situates words in space more 
 The beginning of the paragraph is moved to the end. 
 A single line slides out of a justified block. 
 Daniel Arbello 
 Kapila Chase 
 Print situates words in space 
 more relentlessly than writing 
 ever did. 
 Print situates 
 sound world to 
 Writing moves words 
 words in space 
 a world of visual 
 from the sound world 
 more relentlessly 
 space, but print 
 to a world of 
 than writing ever 
 locks words into 
 did. Writing moves 
 position in this 
 V I S U A L S P A C E 
 words from the 
 space. 
 but print locks words into 
 Control of 
 machine-made, 
 position in this space. Control 
 position is 
 as they are. In 
 of position is everything in 
 everything in 
 handwriting, 
 print. Printed texts look 
 print. Printed 
 control of space 
 machine-made, as they are. 
 texts look 
 tends to be 
 In handwriting, control of 
 ornamental, 
 by its tidiness 
 space tends to be ornamental, 
 ornate, as in calligraphy. 
 ornate, as in 
 and invisibility: 
 Typographic control typically 
 calligraphy. 
 the lines perfectly 
 impresses most by its tidiness 
 Typographic 
 regular, all 
 and invisibility: the lines 
 control typically 
 justified on the 
 perfectly regular, all justified 
 impresses most 
 right side, 
 on the right side, everything 
 everything coming 
 in manuscripts. 
 coming out even visually, and 
 out even visually, 
 This is an 
 without the aid of guidelines 
 and without the 
 insistent world of 
 or ruled borders that often 
 aid of guidelines 
 cold, non- 
 occur in manuscripts. 
 or ruled borders 
 human, facts. 
 that often occur 
 This is an insistent world of 
 cold, non-human, facts. 
 Elements break away from a justified column. 
 Text is forced into a grid of ragged squares. 
 Efrat Levush 
 Kim Bender 
 text | 119 
 
 VERTICAL 
 Roman letters are designed to sit side by side, not 
 on top of one another. Stacks of lowercase letters 
 are especially awk ward because the ascenders and 
 descenders make the vertical spacing appear 
 uneven, and the varied width of the characters 
 makes the stacks look precarious. (The letter I is a perennial problem.) Capital letters form more 
 stable stacks than lowercase letters. Centering the 
 column helps to even out the differences in 
 width. Many Asian writing systems, including 
 Chinese, are traditionally written vertically; the 
 square shape of the characters supports this 
 orientation. The simplest way to make a line of 
 Latin text vertical is to rotate the text from 
 horizontal to vertical. This preserves the natural 
 book spines Stacked letters sometimes appear on 
 affinity among letters sitting on a line while 
 the spines of books, but vertical baselines are more common. Starting from the top and reading down 
 creating a vertical axis. 
 is the dominant direction in the United States. 
 v 
 v 
 v 
 v 
 a v 
 fil er 
 e 
 e 
 e 
 e 
 m by a tigo 
 r 
 r 
 r 
 r 
 lfred 
 cock 
 tigo a film 
 h 
 by 
 t 
 t 
 t 
 t 
 hitc 
 hitc 
 ver alfred 
 i 
 i 
 i 
 i 
 hcock 
 hitc 
 tigo 
 g 
 g 
 g 
 g 
 by alfred 
 hcock 
 o 
 o 
 o 
 o 
 ver a film 
 T YPE 
 small caps, stacked 
 top to bottom 
 bottom to top 
 both directions 
 stacked lowercase 
 vertical baselines There is no fixed rule 
 determining whether type should run from top to 
 bottom or from bottom to top. It is more common, 
 however, especially in the United States, to run text on the spines of books from top to bottom. (You can also run text up and down simultaneously.) 
 120 | thinking with type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 stacked letters in urban space 
 mexican street signs 
 Photographs by Andrea 
 Marks. Stacked letters often 
 appear on commercial street 
 signs, which often employ thin, 
 vertical slices of space. The 
 letters in these signs were drawn 
 by hand. Wide characters and 
 squared-off O s stack better than 
 narrow letters with traditional 
 rounded forms. In some 
 instances, the letters have been 
 specially aligned to create 
 vertical relationships, as in the 
 “Optica” sign at right, painted 
 on a sliver of flat molding inside 
 a door frame. 
 text | 121 
 
 VERTICAL 
 122 | thinking with type 
 
 vertical baselines 
 simpatico Poster for 
 the Public Theater, 1994. 
 Designer: Paula Scher/ 
 Pentagram. Type set on 
 a vertical baseline creates 
 movement across the poster. 
 The theater’s logo, which also 
 employs a vertical baseline, 
 can be easily placed on street 
 banners. 
 parallelen im 
 schnittpunkt 
 (crossing parallels) 
 Poster, 1997. Designer: 
 Gerwin Schmidt. Publisher: 
 Art-Club Karlsruhe. The axes 
 of type and landscape intersect 
 to create posters that are simple, 
 powerful, and direct. The text 
 is mirrored in German and 
 French. 
 text | 123 
 
 
 
 ENLARGED 
 n the beginning of a text, the reader 
 needs an invitation to come inside. Enlarged 
 capitals, also called versals , commonly mark the entrance to a chapter in a book or an article 
 in a magazine. Many medieval manuscripts are 
 illuminated with elaborately painted rubrics. 
 This tradition continued with the rise of the 
 printing press. At first, initials were hand- 
 painted onto printed pages, making mass- 
 produced books resemble manuscripts, which were more valuable than printed books. Initials soon became part of typography. A printer could set them together with the main text in wood blocks or cast lead characters, or add them with a separate process such as engraving. Today, enlarged caps are easily styled as part of a publication’s typographic system. 
 a view of the monuments Book page, eighteenth 
 new york times book review Newspaper page, 2009. Art director: century. This page was printed in two passes: letterpress Nicholas Blechman. Illustrator: Ellen Lupton. The dropped capital is a type with engraved illustrations. 
 separate illustration placed in the layout. 
 124 | thinking with type 
 I 
 styling enlarged initials 
 n this paragraph, the enlarged capital sits on the same baseline as the text that follows. This simple solution is easy to implement on both page and screen. Setting the first few words of the text block in small capitals helps smooth the transition between the initial and the text. 
 A n enlarged letter cut into the text block is called a dropped capital or drop cap . This example was produced using the Drop Caps feature in InDesign. The software automatically creates a space around one or more characters and drops them the requested number of lines. The designer can adjust the size and tracking of the capital to match it to the surrounding text. Similar solutions can be implemented on the web in CSS. The space around the capital is rectangular, which can be visually awkward, as seen here with the sloping silhouette of the letter A . 
 as it the best of times, the worst of times, or just 
 Times New Roman? The dropped capital used here W (The Serif Bold) was positioned as a separate element. A text wrap was applied to an invisible box sitting behind the capital, so that the text appears to flow around the intruding right prow of the W . Likewise, the left prow extends out into the margin, making the character feel firmly anchored in the text block. Hand-crafted solutions like this one cannot be applied systematically. 
 GRAB 
 READER 
 THE 
 AND 
 EVER 
 also possible, such as inserting a title or subtitle into space carved from the primary text block. Such devices mobilize a familar page structure for diverse and sometimes unexpected uses. 
 text | 125 
 MARKING 
 Paragraphs do not occur in nature. Whereas 
 The table is covered with a table cloth which itself is protected sentences are grammatical units intrinsic to the 
 by a plastic table cloth. Drapes and double drapes are at the spoken language, paragraphs are a literary 
 windows. We have carpets, slipcovers, coasters, wain scoting, convention designed to divide masses of content 
 lampshades. Each trinket sits on a doily, each flower in its pot, into appetizing portions. 
 and each pot in its saucer. 
 Indents have been common since the 
 Everything is protected and surrounded. Even in the gar den, seventeenth century. Adding space between 
 each cluster is encircled with wire netting, each path is outlined by bricks, mosaics, or flagstones. 
 paragraphs ( paragraph spacing ) is another 
 This could be analyzed as an anxious sequestration, as an standard device. On the web, a paragraph is a 
 obsessional symbolism: the obsession of the cottage owner semantic unit (the &lt;p&gt; tag in html) that is 
 and small capitalist not only to possess, but to underline what typically displayed on screen with space inserted 
 he possesses two or three times. There, as other places, the after it. 
 unconscious speaks in the redundancy of signs, in their connotations and overworking. 
 A typical indent is an em space , or a quad , a fixed unit of space roughly the width of the 
 — Jean Baudrillard, 1969 
 letter’s cap height. An em is thus proportional to 
 the size of the type; if you change the point size 
 or column width, the indents will remain 
 indent and line break 
 appropriately scaled. Alternatively, you can use 
 the tab key to create an indent of any depth. 
 A designer might use this technique in order to 
 The table is covered with a table cloth which itself is protected align the indents with a vertical grid line or other 
 by a plastic table cloth. Drapes and double drapes are at the windows. We have carpets, slipcovers, coasters, wainscoting, page element. Avoid indenting the very first line 
 lampshades. Each trinket sits on a doily, each flower in its pot, of a body of text. An indent signals a break or 
 and each pot in its saucer. 
 separation; there is no need to make a break 
 Everything is protected and surrounded. Even in the garden, when the text has just begun. 
 each cluster is encircled with wire netting, each path is out-Despite the ubiquity of indents and paragraph 
 lined by bricks, mosaics, or flagstones. 
 spacing, designers have developed numerous 
 This could be analyzed as an anxious sequestration, as an alternatives that allow them to shape content in 
 obsessional symbolism: the obsession of the cottage owner distinctive ways. 
 and small capitalist not only to possess, but to underline what he possesses two or three times. There, as other places, the NERD 
 unconscious speaks in the redundancy of signs, in their con-your page layout program to insert a precise increment of notations and overworking. 
 space between paragraphs. Skipping a full line often creates 
 — 
 too open an effect and wastes a lot of space. Get in the habit Jean Baudrillard, 1969 
 of inserting a full paragraph return (Enter key) only at the end of paragraphs; insert a line break when you don’t want to add line break and 1/2 line space (paragraph spacing) 
 additional space (Shift + Enter). 
 126 | thinking with type 
 breaking text into pieces 
 The table is covered with a table cloth which itself is protected The table is covered with a table cloth which itself is protected by a plastic table cloth. Drapes and double drapes are at the by a plastic table cloth. Drapes and double drapes are at the windows. We have carpets, slipcovers, coasters, wain scoting, windows. We have carpets, slipcovers, coasters, wainscoting, lampshades. Each trinket sits on a doily, each flower in its lampshades. Each trinket sits on a doily, each flower in its pot, pot, and each pot in its saucer. 
 and each pot in its saucer. Everything is protected and sur-Everything is protected and surrounded. Even in the garden, rounded. Even in the garden, each cluster is encircled with wire each cluster is encircled with wire netting, each path is out-netting, each path is outlined by bricks, mosaics, or lined by bricks, mosaics, or flagstones. 
 flagstones. This could be analyzed as an anxious sequestra-This could be analyzed as an anxious sequestration, as an tion, as an obsessional symbolism: the obsession of the cottage obses sional symbolism: the obsession of the cottage owner owner and small capitalist not only to possess, but to underline and small capitalist not only to possess, but to underline what he possesses two or three times. There, as other places, what he possesses two or three times. There, as other places, the unconscious speaks in the redundancy of signs, in their the unconscious speaks in the redundancy of signs, in their connotations and overworking. 
 connotations and overworking. 
 — Jean Baudrillard, 1969 
 — Jean Baudrillard, 1969 
 outdent (hanging indentation) and line break 
 extra space inside line, without line break 
 The table is covered with a table cloth which itself is pro-The table is covered with a table cloth which itself is protected tected by a plastic table cloth. Drapes and double drapes are at by a plastic table cloth. Drapes and double drapes are at the the windows. We have carpets, slipcovers, coasters, wainscot-windows. We have carpets, slipcovers, coasters, wainscoting, ing, lampshades. Each trinket sits on a doily, each flower in its lampshades. Each trinket sits on a doily, each flower in its pot, pot, and each pot in its saucer. 
 and each pot in its saucer. ■ Everything is protected and surrounded. Even in the garden, each cluster is encircled with Everything is protected and surrounded. Even in the garden, wire netting, each path is outlined by bricks, mosaics, or each cluster is encircled with wire netting, each path is out-flagstones. ■ This could be analyzed as an anxious sequestra-lined by bricks, mosaics, or flagstones. 
 tion, as an obsessional symbolism: the obsession of the cottage This could be analyzed as an anxious sequestration, as an owner and small capitalist not only to possess, but to underline ob ses sional symbolism: the obsession of the cottage owner what he possesses two or three times. There, as other places, and small capitalist not only to possess, but to underline what the unconscious speaks in the redundancy of signs, in their he possesses two or three times. There, as other places, the connotations and overworking. 
 uncons cious speaks in the redundancy of signs, in their connotations and overworking. 
 — Jean Baudrillard, 1969 
 — Jean Baudrillard, 1969 
 symbol, wthout indent or line break 
 T YPE 
 and indents together squanders space and gives the text block a flabby, indefinite shape. 
 text | 127 
 
 
 MARKING 
 Different kinds of content invite different 
 approaches to marking paragraphs. In early 
 printed books, paragraphs were indicated with 
 a symbol, such as ||, with no additional space or 
 line break. In the seven teenth century, it became 
 standard to indent the first line of a paragraph 
 and break the line at the end. Commercial 
 printing tends to embrace fragmentation over 
 wholeness, allowing readers to sample bits and 
 pieces of text. Modern literary forms such as the 
 interview invite designers to construct inventive 
 typographic systems. 
 bible Page detail, c. 1500. In this beautiful arrangement, the commercial pamphlet, 1911. This busy design entreats the dense, unbroken text column contrasts with a flurry of surrounding reader with an overload of signals: indents, line breaks, paragraph details, including a dropped capital, marginal notes, and the spacing, and ornaments. 
 triangular chapter summary. 
 128 | thinking with type 
 
 
 experimenting with paragraph breaks 
 museums of tomorrow: 
 a virtual discussion Book 
 spread, 2004. Designed by 
 Franc Nunoo-Quarcoo 
 and Karen Howard. Outdents 
 (instead of indents) mark 
 paragraph breaks in this multi- 
 authored text. 
 design beyond design 
 Book spread, 2004. Designed 
 and edited by Jan van Toorn. 
 Lines and blocks of text slide 
 into the margin to mark 
 changes of voice in an ongoing 
 conversation. 
 text | 129 
 
 
 
 CAPTIONS 
 The placement and styling of captions affect the 
 el banco de uno | Signage proposal | Agency: Saffron | Design: Joshua Distler, Mike Abbink, Gabor Schreier, Virginia Sardón reader’s experience as well as the visual economy 
 and impact of page layouts. Some readers are 
 el banco de uno 
 primarily attracted to pictures and captions, 
 Signage proposal 
 Agency: Saffron 
 while others prefer to follow a dominant written 
 Design: Joshua Distler, 
 Mike Abbink, Gabor 
 narrative, consulting illustrations in support of the Schreier, Virginia Sardón 
 text. From a reader’s perspective, close proximity 
 of captions and images is a welcome convenience. 
 Placing captions adjacent to pictures is not always Schreier M Design: J Agency S e ignage proposal l an efficient use of space, however. Designers 
 ike A 
 
 el banco de uno 
 ba 
 Signage proposal 
 n 
 bbink, G 
 : S 
 c 
 should approach such problems editorially. If 
 , V 
 oshua Distler 
 o 
 Agency: Saffron 
 a 
 
 irginia S 
 ff 
 de 
 Design: Joshua Distler, 
 ron 
 
 captions are essential to understanding the visual 
 u 
 Mike Abbink, Gabor 
 abor 
 
 
 no 
 Schreier, Virginia Sardón 
 ardón 
 
 content, keep them close to the pictures. If their 
 , 
 
 function is merely documentary, adjacency is 
 more easily sacrificed. 
 $$" 
 
 *'&gt;/$ 
 
 $(. 0')( 
 

 
 $#)') &amp;* % 
 
 " %' 
 
 *)//* +*- %8 +* . - *).$ -* 0( 
 !*-( *(0)$;:* )/$,0 )/- *. +-/$*. 
 *. . 0. ($'$/)/ . *$ ./ !*-( ,0 0'* 
 ( ! (!) +( 
 *-/. )0)$*0 +*- 2 (+'* *. )$/*. * 
 7. ' $;@ . 0-*+ $. "*- * ,0 - 
 $)/-*03$- 0( )*1$ )1$- +*- 
 '0 /**/# *. #$/)/ . ,0 / )#( 
 
 
 .. / )*'*"$ /$1 ). - "$@ . 
 
 
 :* -/ - . 1 3 '$($/ (82$(* 
 +*- *) +..- -1) 
 6 !*-( *(0)$;:* ($. /-$$*)' *. 
 / 2/* ) ./ )*1 !*-( *(0)$;:* 
 (+)# .*$'$./ 
 +-/$*. *( *. . 0. ($'$/)/ . .$(+/$3)/ . 
 ,0 - +'$ * ./$'* '$)"0" ( *. (. 
 :* + ). +- )1$- $)!*-(;@ . .*- 
 &lt; ($. *)$. $- / *( $! - ); 
 /$1$ . +-/$8-$. (. .*- /0* +- 
 . ( )." ). )1$. !$- ( ..&gt;1 $. 
 - *'# - *+$)$@ . 4 '/0- ( ,0 -$8(*. 
 /**. *. . "0$*- . 8 ,0 ( $" ,0 &lt; 
 0( ) - ;* .+ &gt;!$* +- - - 
 + ). 0( (* (. - .$=)$ 
 ,0 $2. .*- - &gt;(*. ($. 
 +A'$ %8 -$0 /' *(* 
 ($'. +*- $5 +*)/ * 
 
 +0/*. +*-/0"0 . . 
 . - /8-$*" -' * 
 *:* *- $- 
 
 
 
 
 
 ADRIANO NOBRE 
 )4'551 &amp;1 2#46+&amp;1 '/ '8'4'+41 =56+ 
 -$ +, $ $ )/!( 
 adriano.nobre@ionline.pt 
 8'4#/ 01 %10)4'551 10&amp;' ,B &amp;'4#/ #.)7 
 /#5 +&amp;'+#5 ' &amp;'5&amp;' '06D1 6'/15 '56#&amp;1 
 . "!$' ()' # #)'#) 
 %#/+0*1 2#4# # /#+14+# #$51.76# #6F 
 '/ %106#%61 2'4/#0'06' 2#4# &amp;'%+&amp;+4 # 
 21&amp;' 0D1 2#55#4 2'.1 9+66'4 /#5 # %#/ 
 2#46' 12'4#%+10#. &amp;' #.)7/#5 +0+%+#6+8#5 
 2#0*# &amp;' 15F I%4#6'5 0#5 24I:+/#5 
 37' 37'4'/15 &amp;'5'081.8'4&gt; %1/1 1 '08+1 
 
 
 
 ='55'0%+#. 2#4# )#4#06+4 1 8161 17 %4+#4 
 '.'+EJ'5 .')+5.#6+8#5 8#+ 6'4 0#5 4'&amp;'5 
 &amp;' 214 $.7'6116* 2#4# #5 .1%#.+&amp;# 
 0( - .*$' . -1 +- '$( )/- - ';@ . 
 ! 
 
 .#E15 /#+5 (146'5&gt; ='55' #52'%61 %10 
 51%+#+5 7/ 2#.%1 24+8+.')+#&amp;1 2#4# 6'0 
 &amp;'5 214 10&amp;' 2#55#4 # %#4#8#0# &amp;# %#/ 
 ($3 *0 /-'#* ( .0+*-/ *)'$) +*- ,0 
 6+07#/15 %108+%615 &amp;' 37' 1 %106#%61 
 
 
 6#4 %4+#4 7/# 10&amp;# &amp;' '0675+#5/1 ' /+.+ 
 2#0*# 51%+#.+56# 0#5 .')+5.#6+8#5 
 ):* +-*1 $/8' +- 0( )/- ,0)/$ 
 2'551#. ' &amp;+4'%61 %106+07# # 5'4 # /'.*14 
 
 
 6C0%+# 51%+#.+56# '064' 15 '.'+614'5 
 5+6' I%4#6'5 &amp;'5%4+61 %1/1 7/ 
 1*/*.
 $! - ); ./8 + ). ) /-).!*-(;:* 
 #4/#&gt; &amp;'('0&amp;' 1(+# 4+.1 %1.#$14#&amp;1 
 
 
 
 %#0&amp;+&amp;#674# &amp;' #4#%- $#/# A 24' 
 /18+/'061 10.+0' &amp;' #21+1 A 4''.'+ED1 
 * *) $/* 4($"*5 ( 4 ' $/*-5 -&amp; 
 4# &amp;1 &amp;'2#46#/'061 &amp;' 2412#)#0&amp;# &amp;1 
 5+&amp;G0%+# &amp;15 56#&amp;15 0+&amp;15 F # 4'('4G0 
 &amp;1 24+/'+41/+0+5641 F 7/ ':'/2.1 &amp;'5 
 ( *). "0$0 - 0)$- ($. 
 ($'#@ . 
 ' )'5614# &amp;15 5+6'5 +056+67%+10#+5 
 %+# &amp;'56# '564#6F)+# # 6'06#6+8# &amp;' 4'2.+ 
 5# %1.#$14#ED1 241,'%61 4'2.+%# #.)7 
 4($"*.5 )* **&amp; . +-/$*. 
 =55'0%+#.&gt; =24+14+6B4+1&gt; ' =+0&amp;+52'05B 
 2#46+&amp;1 57$.+0*# 37' (1+ =1 24+/'+41 
 %#4 # =/7&amp;#0E#&gt; &amp;'/1%4#6# '/ "#5*+0) 
 /#5 4'%'+6#5 10.+0' 0# %#0&amp;+&amp;#674# &amp;' 
 +*-/0"0 . . ):* .:* ..$( /:* 
 8'.&gt; 5 2#.#84#5 5D1 70C0+/'5 01 &amp;+5 
 # '56#4 10.+0'&gt; &amp;'5&amp;' 6'/ #7/'0 
 610 8#+ %106#4 %1/ 7/ %1064+$761 &amp;' 
 $#/# A 24'5+&amp;G0%+# 0146'#/'4+%#0# 
 ($$*.*. (. 1:* ./- 
 %7451 &amp;15 4'52105B8'+5 2'.15 24+0%+2#+5 
 6#&amp;1 57%'55+8#/'06' # 1('46# &amp;' %106'K 
 2'51 1 #46+&amp;1 1%+#.+56# %1064#617 15 
 %1/1 # #2156# '/ %*#65 '/+55D1 &amp;' 
 /**. +- . )/ . 
 2#46+&amp;15 21467)7'5'5 '56#4 10.+0' F '55'0 
 &amp;15 !H&amp;'15 10.+0' (I4705 &amp;+)+6#+5 ' 241 
 5'48+E15 &amp;# .7' 6#6' +)+6#. '/24'5# 
 8H&amp;'15 17 # 241/1ED1 &amp;' (I4705 &amp;'5 
 %+#. 5'4 8+561 0#5 4'&amp;'5 51%+#+5 F 24+14+ 
 )4#/# &amp;' 4B&amp;+1 '/ 21&amp;%#56 5D1 ,B 7/ 
 4'52105B8'. 2'.1 &amp;'5'081.8+/'061 &amp;# 
 6#37' 8#+ 214F/ 2#4# # 4'&amp;' 51%+#. ;18 
 6B4+1 #.+/'06#4 # +06'4#%6+8+&amp;#&amp;' %1/ 
 *B$+61 #4# # 5'/#0# ' 21437' F =0'%'5 
 8'46'06' 10.+0' ' /7.6+/F&amp;+# &amp;# %#/2# 
 37' 24'6'0&amp;' 70+4 5+/2#6+&lt;#06'5 ' %4+#4 
 15 %+&amp;#&amp;D15 F +0&amp;+52'05B8'. 14 +551 
 5B4+1 6'4 7/# 8+5D1 +06')4#&amp;# &amp;# %1/7 
 0*# &amp;1 #)14# 24'5+&amp;'06' #4#%- $#/# 
 =7/# '5647674# 2#4#.'.# &amp;' 2'551#5 0D1 
 '56D1 61&amp;15 24'5'06'5 .1 
 0+%#ED1 21.H6+%#&gt; 5'4D1 #070%+#&amp;#5 %10 
 ')70&amp;1 +0(14/#EJ'5 4'%1.*+&amp;#5 2'.1 
 8+0%7.#&amp;#5 #1 2#46+&amp;1&gt; 
 %1 &amp;' 537'4&amp;# ' #2156#/ %#&amp;# 
 6#5 01 9+66'4 01 #%'$11- ' 01 .+%-4 
 i ,7061 &amp;1 )#$+0'6' &amp;1 24+/'+41/+0+5 
 .7' 6#6' (1+ # '/24'5# 37' %4+17 1 
 8'&lt; /#+5 0# 9'$ 2#4# %1/70+%#4 %1/ 
 '&amp;'5 10&amp;' 1 ,B /#4%# 24'5'0E# 
 641 1 1$,'%6+81 F 64#052146#4 2#4# 14 
 5+6' /;$#4#%-1$#/#%1/ 2.#6#(14/# 
 1 '.'+614 4'61401 )#4#06'/ =F /7+61 
 #. %1/1 01 ;2#%' ' + 7&amp;1 =#)4' 
 67)#. 1 %10%'+61 &amp;' %#/2#0*# &amp;' 241:+ 
 37' 4'%1.*'7 15 &amp;10#6+815 ' # #0)#4+# 
 +/2146#06'&gt; #5 #+0&amp;# 0D1 F &amp;'%+5+81 
 )#&amp;1 01 2146#. 537'4&amp;#0'6 7/ %#0#. 
 /+&amp;#&amp;' #&amp;126#&amp;# 214 $#/# 1/ %10 
 ED1 &amp;' 81.706B4+15 2#4# # %#0&amp;+&amp;#674# 
 =/ *178' 7/# 24+/'+4# 8+4# 
 +0(14/#6+81 #%67#.+&lt;#&amp;1 &amp;+#4+#/'06'&gt; 
 6#%615 &amp;+B4+15 #64#8F5 &amp;' '/#+.5 
 1 4'57.6#&amp;1 (1+ #8#55#.#&amp;14 
 /+.*J'5 
 )'/ # 5F4+1 2#4# 1 10.+0' /#5 #+0&amp;# +0%+ 
 = #%'551 A5 016H%+#5 #.6'4175' /7+61 ' 
 (I4705 10.+0' ' 4'&amp;'5 51%+#+5 %1/1 1 #%' 
 &amp;' &amp;10#6+815 2'551#+5 

 /+.*J'5 &amp;' 
 2+'06' )14# 8#+ 5'4 7/ 217%1 /'.*14 
 ,B *B 2'551#5 37' 5I %1051/'/ +0(14 
 $11- 1 + 1 9+66'4 17 1 .+%-4 
 '7415 #0)#4+#&amp;15 ' /+.*J'5 &amp;' 2#46+%+ 
 '/$14# A5 8'&lt;'5 5+06# 37' #5 #2156# 5D1 
 /#ED1 #64#8F5 &amp;' 5+6'5 17 4'&amp;'5 51%+#+5 
 5 2#.#84#5 &amp;' 14&amp;'/ 5D1 #0)#4+#4 01815 
 2#06'5 '/ 4'&amp;'5 51%+#+5 0# +06'40'6 
 ('+6#5 0D1 6#061 2'.1 %106'K&amp;1 %1/1 2'.#5 
 5 2#46+&amp;15 0D1 21&amp;'/ #.*'#45' &amp;+551&gt; 
 /+.+6#06'5 %+/'06#4 5+/2#6+#5 ' )#4#0 
 .F/ &amp;' 6'4 64#$#.*#&amp;1 0'56'5 241,'% 
 016H%+#5 37' 21&amp;'/ )'4#4&gt; &amp;+&lt; 1 5'%4' 
 %1056#6# 14)' 156# &amp;+4'%614 &amp;' %#/ 
 6+4 24'5'0E#5 0#5 #%6+8+&amp;#&amp;'5 &amp;# %#/2# 
 615 %1/ 15 &amp;'/1%4#6#5 # .7' 6#6' ,B 
 
 6B4+1)'4#. #&amp;,7061 &amp;1 /H&amp;+1 7'4 
 2#0*# &amp;1 2#4# #5 '7412'+#5 #H # 
 0*# 51%+#.+56# ? 17 5',# 7/ 64#$#.*1 &amp;' 
 %1.#$1417 %1/ 1 #46+&amp;1 4#$#.*+56# 
 (+)# -&amp; ( +- . ' $;@ . 
 4'+41 2'5#4 &amp;#5 4'6+%G0%+#5 1 51%+#. 
 '/+55D1 &amp;' &amp;'$#6'5 0# +06'40'6 17 1 #241 
 (70&amp;1 ,7061 &amp;#5 $#5'5 &amp;1 2#46+&amp;1 %1/ 1 
 +0).G5 #%14&amp;1 %1/ 1 F 7/ 0181 2#5 
 +- .$ )$$. )*-/ ( -$). +?. $)/ -) / )* 
 &amp;'/1%4#6# 0D1 6'/ &amp;K8+&amp;#5 =@ +0')B 
 8'+6#/'061 =&amp;15 2'4(+5 17 $.1)7'5 &amp;15 
 1$,'%6+81 &amp;' #.#4)#4 #1 /B:+/1 1 70+ 
 51 0# +06'40#%+10#.+&lt;#ED1 &amp;# '/24'5# 
 )/-* . / );@ . /**. *. +*'&gt;/$*. . 
 8'. 37' '56#5 (14/#5 &amp;' %1/70+%#ED1 
 /+.+6#06'5&gt; %1/1 =+05647/'061 &amp;' %1/7 
 8'451 &amp;' 816#06'5 &amp;1 37' 6'4B 0# 
 37' 8G 0'56# %1.#$14#ED1 7/# 2155H8'. 
 +-$)$+$. +-/$*. +*-/0"0 . . %8 ./:* *)'$) #8 
 '081.8'/ /#+5 #5 2'551#5 ' F +/2155H 
 0+%#ED1 %1/'06B4+1 17 #.'46# 2#4# #%6+ 
 +/#)'/ &amp;' I%4#6'5 ? A 5'/'.*#0E# &amp;' 
 2106' 2#4# 1 /'4%#&amp;1 $4#5+.'+41 
 18-$*. )*. (. :* 1 3 ($. $(+*-/9)$ 
 8'. 7/ 2#46+&amp;1 /1&amp;'401 0D1 '56#4 24' 
 8+&amp;#&amp;'5 &amp;1 &gt; 
 $#/# 0#5 '.'+EJ'5 0146'#/'4+%#0#5 ? 
 ./ +'/!*-( ) .0 *(0)$;:* *( 
 5'06'&gt; 55+/ 1 '56B # =#.+/'06#4 
 @ 1 %#/+0*1 37' 1 37'4 64+.*#4 
 1 (1%1 '55'0%+#. &amp;' 61&amp;# # %1/70+%#ED1 
 *. ' $/*- . +*./ ( 1&gt; *. 
 7/# 24'5'0E# &amp;+0C/+%# ' &amp;' +06'4#%ED1&gt; 
 #6F 21437' =1 0K/'41 &amp;' #&amp;'5J'5 ' 4'5 
 #%14&amp;1 %1/ # .7' 6#6' +)+6#. 5I 
 +*./. &lt; 0( #8$/* . ($..@ . 
 %1/ 15 '.'+614'5 .F/ &amp;1 5+6' 1(+%+#. 1 
 2156#5&gt; A5 +0+%+#6+8#5 &amp;1 2#46+&amp;1 0# +06'4 
 5'4B #070%+#&amp;1 1(+%+#./'06' 01 (+0#. &amp;' 
 ( $- /* - . ( :* ./- 
 2#46+&amp;1 ,B 6'/ %106# 01 9+66'4 ' 01 
 0'6 =6'/ #7/'06#&amp;1 %105+&amp;'4#8'./'0 
 70*1 &amp;#6# '/ 37' #.)705 #&amp;/+0+564# 
 *)'$) &lt; ):* 2$./$- 
 #%'$11- # 24I:+/# 5'/#0# #24'5'0 
 6'&gt; &amp;+&lt; 1 5'%4'6B4+1)'4#. 1D1 ./'+&amp;# 
 &amp;14'5 &amp;# '/24'5# 8+4D1 # 1467)#. =2#4# 
 

! 
 6#4B 018+&amp;#&amp;'5 =1&amp;# # 0155# %#/2# 
 /$14# =%108+%61 &amp;# +/2146C0%+# &amp;# 
 &amp;'(+0+4 61&amp;# # /'61&amp;1.1)+# &amp;' 64#$#.*1 
 
"
 
 0*# 8#+ #2156#4 0# '081.8G0%+# ' 0# 241 
 9'$ &gt; 1 4'52105B8'. &amp;'('0&amp;' 37' 0'5 
 #6F A5 '.'+EJ'5 .')+5.#6+8#5&gt; #8#0E17 #1 
 
 %74# &amp;' (''&amp;$#%- &amp;15 %+&amp;#&amp;D15&gt; )#4#0 
 6# B4'# =F +/2155H8'. %1/2#4#4 1467)#. 
 i # /'5/# (106' 
 6' /H&amp;+1 7'44'+41 
 %1/ 15 56#&amp;15 0+&amp;15&gt; = 01551 '.'+ 
 %1.#$14#ED1 &amp;# '/24'5# 0146'#/' 
 
! 
 6#/$F/ 0D1 0')# # +/2146C0 
 614#&amp;1 0D1 6'/ # /'5/# #2'6G0%+# 37' 
 4+%#0# %1/ 1 6'8' +0H%+1 #06'5 &amp;1 %10 
 
 
 %+# &amp;# +06'40'6 /#5 0D1 # %105+&amp;'4# 
 15 0146'#/'4+%#015 2'.# +06'40'6&gt; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 i Newspaper, 2009. Design: Nick Mrozowski. 
 © www.ionline.pt. Captions tell a story in this 
 layout from the Portuguese newspaper i. 
 130 | thinking with type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 captions change the meaning of pictures 
 Why is the clown sad? How to artfully 
 Avoid overpowering a delicate work of art 
 display a work of art. 
 with a heavy frame. 
 Don’t put a tiny piece of furniture under a 
 Don’t hang objects over a child’s bed, 
 large painting, or vice versa. 
 especially depressing objects. 
 captions for the web Online content 
 management systems coordinate pictures and 
 captions in a database. Designers use rules, 
 frames, overlays, and color blocks to visually 
 connect images and captions, creating 
 coherent units. Shown here are four different 
 ways to style captions for the web. 
 interactive web captions 
 Guardian.co.uk, 2009. Design director: 
 Mark Porter. A secondary caption reveals 
 itself when users rolls over this image on 
 the Guardian ’s home page. 
 text | 131 
 HIERARCHY 
 A typographic hierarchy expresses the organization Emphasizing a word or phrase within a body of of content, emphasizing some elements and 
 text usually requires only one signal. Italic is the subordinating others. A visual hierarchy helps 
 standard form of emphasis. There are many 
 readers scan a text, knowing where to enter and 
 alternatives, however, including boldface , small exit and how to pick and choose among its 
 caps, or a change in color. A full-range type family 
 offerings. Each level of the hierarchy should be 
 such as Scala has many weight and style variations 
 signaled by one or more cues, applied consistently designed to work together. You can also create across a body of text. A cue can be spatial (indent, emphasis with a different font . If you want to line spacing, placement) or graphic (size, style, 
 mix font families, such as Scala and Futura , adjust color). Infinite variations are possible. 
 the sizes so that the x-heights align. 
 Writers are trained to avoid redundancy as seen 
 in the expressions “future plans” or “past history.” 
 BOLD, 
 In typography, some redundancy is acceptable, 
 even recommended. For example, paragraphs are 
 ITALIC, 
 traditionally marked with a line break and an 
 UNDERLINED 
 indent, a redundancy that has proven quite 
 practical, as each signal provides backup for the 
 CAPS! 
 other. To create an elegant economy of signals, try 
 using no more than three cues for each level or 
 TYPE 
 break in a document. 
 too many signals 
 Emphasis can be created 
 with just one shift. 
 EXPRESSING 
 
 
 I Division of angels 
 Division of angels 
 division of angels 
 
 
 
 A. Angel 
 
 Angel 
 
 Angel 
 
 angel 
 
 B. Archangel 
 
 Archangel 
 
 Archangel 
 
 division archangel 
 
 C. Cherubim 
 
 Cherubim 
 
 Cherubim 
 
 of angels cherubim 
 
 D. Seraphim 
 
 Seraphim 
 
 Seraphim 
 
 seraphim 
 II Ruling body of clergy 
 Ruling body of clergy 
 ruling body of clergy 
 
 
 A. Pope 
 
 Pope 
 
 Pope 
 
 pope 
 
 B. Cardinal 
 
 Cardinal 
 
 Cardinal 
 
 ruling body cardinal 
 
 C. Archbishop 
 
 Archbishop 
 
 Archbishop 
 
 of clergy archbishop 
 
 D. Bishop 
 
 Bishop 
 
 Bishop 
 
 bishop 
 III Parts of a text 
 Parts of a text 
 parts of a text 
 
 
 A. Work 
 
 Work 
 
 Work 
 
 work 
 
 B. Chapter 
 
 Chapter 
 
 Chapter 
 
 parts of chapter 
 
 C. Section 
 
 Section 
 
 Section 
 
 a text section 
 
 D. Subsection 
 
 Subsection 
 
 Subsection 
 
 
 subsection 
 
 symbols, indents, 
 indents and 
 font change, indents, 
 alignment, font change, 
 and line breaks 
 line breaks only 
 and line breaks 
 and line breaks 
 132 | thinking with type 
 hierarchy is relational 
 main head 
 common typographic diseases 
 
 Various forms of dysfunction appear among populations exposed main text 
 to typography for long periods of time. Listed here are a number of frequently observed afflictions. 
 typophilia An excessive attachment to and fascination with the shape of letters, often to the exclusion of other interests and object choices. Typophiliacs usually die penniless and alone. 
 typophobia The irrational dislike of letterforms, often marked by a preference for icons, dingbats, and—in fatal cases—bullets and daggers. The fears of the typophobe can often be quieted (but not cured) by steady doses of Helvetica and Times Roman. 
 subsections 
 typochondria A persistent anxiety that one has selected the wrong typeface. This condition is often paired with okd (optical kerning disorder), the need to constantly adjust and readjust the spaces between letters. 
 typothermia The promiscuous refusal to make a lifelong commitment to a single typeface—or even to five or six, as some doctors recommend. The typothermiac is constantly tempted to test drive “hot” new fonts, often without a proper license. 
 
 COMMON TYPOGRAPHIC DISEASES 
 
 There are endless 
 
 Various forms of dysfunction appear among populations exposed to typography for long periods of time. Listed ways to express 
 
 here are a number of frequently observed afflictions. 
 the hierarchy 
 Typophilia An excessive attachment to and fascination with the shape of of a document. 
 
 letters, often to the exclusion of other interests and object choices. 
 
 Typophiliacs usually die penniless and alone. 
 
 
