Using no external skill here — this is a self-contained creative writing/JSON deliverable, not a coding or debugging task, so I'm proceeding directly with the treatment work as specified.

```json
{
  "ideas": [
    {
      "truth": "We've been trained to expect exactly what we're owed and nothing more; noticing a small unasked-for extra is what actually restores trust.",
      "moment": "The instant one more coin of warm light tips onto a palm that already holds the exact, counted amount.",
      "key_frame": "Warm golden light spilling from a turning brass-gold key onto a palm holding an exact stack of dull coins, one extra coin catching the light as it falls on top."
    },
    {
      "truth": "Small acts of generosity between strangers, in an otherwise brisk transaction, are what make us trust someone again.",
      "moment": "The beat where a vendor's routine, exact change-count softens into placing one extra token on top.",
      "key_frame": "Two hands meeting over a market counter, a small extra brass token catching light as it's set atop a pile of already-counted coins."
    },
    {
      "truth": "We distrust 'more' because it's usually a trick (fine print, upsell); a clean, wordless overflow feels rare and honest.",
      "moment": "The second a pour crosses an etched fill-line inside a sealed vessel and keeps going, briefly, on purpose.",
      "key_frame": "A thin ribbon of backlit gold liquid caught mid-pour, crossing an etched fill-line inside a dark glass vessel, no hand in frame."
    }
  ],
  "chosen": 0,
  "why": "It keeps one relatable individual (people feel for individuals, not abstractions), stages a real before/after conflict (exact vs. a little more), and gives one clean literal demonstration of the tagline's 'key' pun without inventing unverified AI/UI footage.",
  "treatment": "We open cold: a hand, palm up, holds a stack of coins under a slot in a black panel — exact, counted, nothing extra. The slot clicks once, drops the final coin. Flat light, a mechanical clink. This is the world: you get precisely what you're owed. Cut to the same hand, same panel — now a small brass-gold key is turning in the slot. As it completes its turn, warm light spills from the seam and pours over the stack; one more coin, glowing, tips onto the palm on top of the exact count. The hand closes around it. A voice speaks the line as it appears on screen: 'Aight. One key to AI that always gives back a little more.' We hold on the key, catching light, as the wordmark settles beside it.",
  "decisions": {
    "D1_idea": "The moment an already-exact, counted amount receives one more measure of warmth than it owed — that's when Aight's promise becomes real.",
    "D2_conflict": "The world (and most tools, including most AI) give you exactly what you paid for, counted and cold, never more; that flatness is the obstacle before the product enters.",
    "D3_roles": "The hero is the person receiving value (represented by the hand); Aight plays the guide/enabler as the key — the small object that unlocks one extra measure without being asked.",
    "D4_opening": "First 2 seconds: a close-up, mid-action — the final coin already mid-air, about to land exactly on a counted stack in a palm, cold flat light. Bold, literal image; no faces, no logo, no text yet.",
    "D5_brand": "Brand name first spoken and shown at second 8 (the start of Scene 2), recurs as the key object throughout Scene 2, and again as the wordmark on the end card. No invented software/UI is shown at any point.",
    "D6_ask_and_end": "No hard CTA — this is an awareness film (per ABCD: brand early and throughout, person at the centre). The ask is simply to notice and remember Aight; carried by voice + on-screen text. Final frame: the brass-gold key resting in the palm, warm light held, with wordmark and tagline as end card.",
    "D7_product_truth": [
      {"fact": "Aight is an AI platform.", "source": "customer words — shown only via the wordmark on the end card, never via invented UI/screens, to avoid overclaiming."},
      {"fact": "Aight always gives back a little more.", "source": "customer words — dramatized literally as one extra glowing coin beyond the exact, counted amount."}
    ],
    "D8_deviations": "(1) No screens/UI/dashboard footage is shown, since none was supplied and inventing feature visuals would assert capabilities we can't verify — an object metaphor (key, coins, light) is safer and more concrete. (2) Scenes are built as 8s + 7s (not 2x8s) to hit the customer's explicit 15s spec exactly, prioritising the format over the model's native unit. (3) Scene 1 carries no on-screen copy and no brand, by design, so the 'cold/exact' world plays out fully before any warmth or naming arrives — a deliberate, brief departure from 'brand throughout,' justified because Scene 1 is the deprivation half of the idea and showing brand there would blunt the conflict."
  },
  "scenes": [
    {
      "n": 1,
      "S1_feeling": "Quiet flatness — the mild, unsatisfying feeling of getting exactly what you're owed, nothing more.",
      "S2_first_frame": "A single human hand with warm brown skin, palm facing up, fingers relaxed, resting beneath a rectangular slot cut into a matte black obsidian panel; a small brass-gold key with one round tooth and a thin engraved line sits at the edge of the slot. Dull grey coins are stacked in three exact rows on the palm, the surface cold and flat, studio lighting dim and neutral, plain charcoal background, no other objects in frame.",
      "S3_one_action": "The slot clicks once and drops the final coin precisely onto the top of the exact stack, completing the count; the hand tenses very slightly. Duration: 8 seconds, one continuous take.",
      "S4_new_information": "The viewer learns the rule of this world: you get exactly what's counted, never more. We leave this scene the instant the last coin lands, on the flat, unresolved beat.",
      "S5_impact": "A small anticlimax — cold, exact, slightly unsatisfying. Reads clearly on a phone because the whole idea is one hand, one stack, one clink; nothing competes for attention.",
      "prompt": "Cinematography: locked-off macro shot, slow push-in, shallow depth of field. Camera holds static for the first 2 seconds, then pushes in smoothly and slowly toward the palm for the remaining 6 seconds, coming to rest tight on the coin stack by the final 2 seconds. No re-description of the still: only this motion and framing change. Sound: one sharp mechanical click, then a single hard metallic coin-clink as the last coin lands, followed by a faint cold electronic hum that holds under silence for the rest of the shot. No spoken line in this scene.",
      "duration_s": 8,
      "references": [],
      "spoken": "",
      "on_screen_copy": [],
      "first_frame_still_prompt": "A single human hand with warm brown skin, palm facing up, fingers relaxed, resting beneath a rectangular slot cut into a matte black obsidian panel; a small brass-gold key with one round tooth and a thin engraved line sits at the edge of the slot. Dull grey coins are stacked in three exact rows on the palm, the surface cold and flat, studio lighting dim and neutral, plain charcoal background, no other objects in frame."
    },
    {
      "n": 2,
      "S1_feeling": "Warmth and quiet delight — the small relief of receiving a little more than you expected.",
      "S2_first_frame": "A single human hand with warm brown skin, palm facing up, fingers relaxed, resting beneath a rectangular slot cut into a matte black obsidian panel; a small brass-gold key with one round tooth and a thin engraved line is inserted halfway into the slot, turned partway, with warm golden light already leaking from the seam and touching the top of the exact stack of dull grey coins on the palm below. Studio lighting dim and neutral elsewhere, plain charcoal background.",
      "S3_one_action": "The key completes its turn; warm golden light cascades from the seam over the coin stack, and one extra glowing coin tips over the edge of the stack onto the palm as the hand closes gently around it. Duration: 7 seconds, one continuous take.",
      "S4_new_information": "The viewer learns Aight is the key that adds a little more beyond the exact, expected amount — the brand and its promise are revealed together, in one motion, for the first time.",
      "S5_impact": "A warm, tactile payoff — the glow and the extra coin sell the claim visually even with sound off, and the spoken line plus on-screen text reinforce it, so the film works fully muted on a phone.",
      "prompt": "Cinematography: locked-off macro shot, same framing as the still, very slow drift-in over the full 7 seconds, never re-describing the image. Motion: the key turns the remaining quarter-turn in the first 3 seconds; warm golden light spills and spreads across the coin stack over the next 2 seconds; one glowing coin tips off the top edge onto the palm in the final 2 seconds as fingers begin to close around it. Sound: a soft mechanical turn, then a warm rising tone as the light spreads, a light bright chime as the extra coin lands. Spoken, warm and unhurried, timed to finish as the hand closes: \"Aight. One key to AI that always gives back a little more.\"",
      "duration_s": 7,
      "references": [],
      "spoken": "Aight. One key to AI that always gives back a little more.",
      "on_screen_copy": ["Aight", "One key to AI that always gives back a little more."],
      "first_frame_still_prompt": "A single human hand with warm brown skin, palm facing up, fingers relaxed, resting beneath a rectangular slot cut into a matte black obsidian panel; a small brass-gold key with one round tooth and a thin engraved line is inserted halfway into the slot, turned partway, with warm golden light already leaking from the seam and touching the top of the exact stack of dull grey coins on the palm below. Studio lighting dim and neutral elsewhere, plain charcoal background."
    }
  ],
  "riskiest_scene": 2,
  "finish": {
    "copy_placement": "Scene 1: no text. Scene 2: 'Aight' appears small, top-left, the instant the key completes its turn (synced to the chime); the tagline builds in centered lower-third as it's spoken, word by word, finishing as the hand closes — set in the brand's own wordmark typeface, white on a soft dark gradient plate for contrast against the golden glow.",
    "end_card": "Final freeze on the closed hand and glowing key (last 1.5s of Scene 2, held), with the Aight wordmark and the full tagline centered beneath it, static, no motion.",
    "music": "One warm, minimal sustained pad/tone that stays nearly silent and cold under Scene 1, then swells gently and brightens the instant the key turns in Scene 2 — mood: quiet trust arriving late."
  }
}
```